For release on delivery
6:50 p.m. EDT
April 1, 2024

Hope, Promise, and Mentors

Remarks by
Lisa D. Cook
Member
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
at
The Samuel DuBois Cook Center Career Achievement Awards Ceremony
The University Club,
Washington, D.C.

April 1, 2024

Thank you, Dr. Darity, for your kind introduction. I am profoundly moved to be
surrounded by family and friends, and it gives me another opportunity to tell all of you
that I would not be where I am today without your support. I include in that circle my
fellow award recipients today, Drs. Cecilia Rouse and Peter Blair Henry.
I am beyond humbled and honored to receive this career achievement award from
The Samuel DuBois Cook Center on Social Equity at Duke University, and I am inspired
by what it represents. Of course, to me, Samuel DuBois Cook was simply “Uncle Sam.”
My Uncle Sam was a Korean War veteran, a political theorist, an activist, and the first
African American tenured professor at Duke and any major southern university. He then
went on to become president of Dillard University . . . the list goes on and on. Now that
was a lifetime of achievement.
At Morehouse College, Uncle Sam was a classmate of a young man named
Martin Luther King, Jr. Before that, they picked tobacco together during the summer to
earn the money they needed for their studies. Uncle Sam led the campus chapter of the
NAACP at Morehouse and went on to become student body president (twice) and
valedictorian. Along with my mother Mary Murray Cook, his brother and my dad Rev.
Payton Brailsford Cook, my cousin and civil rights leader Floyd McKissick, Sr., and a
host of other relatives, he instilled in me the deep belief of the Civil Rights Movement
that with faith, preparation, and great effort, things could and would be better. When I
was beaten and suffered verbal assaults while desegregating my schools in Georgia, I
drew strength from the example set by my uncle, my aunts, my parents, and by Dr. King
and their conviction that there is great hope and promise in the world. It was—and

-2remains—the duty of everyone in and who embraced and was inspired by the Civil
Rights Movement to make good on that hope and promise and to build a better future.
I mentioned great effort. That was always paramount for my Uncle Sam. The
New York Times quoted his advice: “Have a vision—a dream of success—and work like
hell.”
Uncle Sam believed people need guides, role models, and taskmasters to take
advantage of the greater opportunities he helped to make possible. We call those guides,
role models, and taskmasters “mentors” for short.
I found many mentors along my academic journey, and I would like to give
special thanks to those I met through the Diversity Initiative for Tenure in Economics,
which Sandy Darity started at Duke in 2008. The Initiative is a research mentoring
workshop that pairs junior faculty with mentors who can help them navigate the path to
tenure. It has seen 53 Initiative fellows being promoted and tenured at institutions of
higher learning.
I am grateful to all the mentors who took my ideas seriously, including Art
Goldsmith who was a DITE mentor, helped me sharpen the hypotheses that emerged
from them, and pressed me to think hard about the best data and methods to test these
hypotheses. Graduate and undergraduate students from many backgrounds ask me how
to find mentors that share their background. I tell them they will need more than one
mentor and to seek out mentors who have different backgrounds and expertise such that
they will be exposed to a wide range of views and experiences. For just one paper on
violence and patents, I had several mentors, among them George Akerlof, Ken Arrow,
Sandy Darity, Barry Eichengreen, Milton Friedman, Alan Krueger, Paul Romer, and Jeff

-3Wooldridge. Most importantly, make sure your mentors challenge you and hold you
accountable. And when the time comes, it is incumbent on you—on all of us, really—to
become a mentor. That is what Uncle Sam did. That is one reason I was grateful to lead
the American Economic Association’s Summer Program, to receive the AEA Mentoring
Program’s Impactful Mentor award for working with graduate students, and to participate
in and support other initiatives to train young economists. Mentors help convert hope
and promise into action, enabling those who come after us to build a better future. As I
learned from Uncle Sam, there is no higher calling.
In closing, let me express my hope that accepting this career achievement award
does not mean I am officially retired. But more seriously, I am very grateful to be
recognized and in the company of colleagues who have stood by me and fought with me
to improve our field. I accept this award in the spirit of challenge it represents. I am
forever mindful of Samuel DuBois Cook’s belief that there is much work ahead of us as
we seek to build a world that is more just and offers more opportunity for all. Although
this may be called a career achievement award, I accept it with the conviction that I am
just getting started.

