For release on delivery
12:40 p.m. EDT (11:40 a.m. CDT)
May 17, 2024

Brief Remarks on the Economy, Monetary Policy, and Bank Regulation

Remarks by
Michelle W. Bowman
Member
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
at
Pennsylvania Bankers Association
2024 Convention
Nashville, Tennessee

May 17, 2024

I would like to thank the Pennsylvania Bankers Association for the invitation to join you
today.1 I appreciate the opportunity to engage with you on matters that affect the banking
industry. Before sharing my thoughts about the current bank regulatory environment, I will
discuss my views on the economy and monetary policy.
Update on the Economy and Monetary Policy Outlook
Over the past two years, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has significantly
tightened the stance of monetary policy to address high inflation. At our meeting earlier this
month, the FOMC voted to continue to hold the federal funds rate target range at 5¼ to 5½
percent and to continue to reduce the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings, but at a slower pace
beginning in June.
After seeing considerable progress on slowing inflation last year, we have not yet seen
further progress this year. The 12-month measures of total and core personal consumption
expenditures (PCE) inflation have moved roughly sideways since December and remained
elevated at 2.7 percent and 2.8 percent, respectively, in March. With average core consumer
price index (CPI) inflation this year through April running at an annualized rate of 4.3 percent,
well above average inflation in the second half of last year, I expect inflation to remain elevated
for some time.
The recent pickup seems to be evident across many goods and services categories,
suggesting that inflation was temporarily lower in the latter half of last year. Prices continue to
be much higher than before the pandemic, which is weighing on consumer sentiment. Inflation

1

The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve
Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.

-2has hit lower-income households hardest since food, energy, and housing services price increases
far outpaced overall inflation throughout this episode.
Economic activity increased at a strong pace last year but may have moderated early this
year. First-quarter gross domestic product growth was temporarily dampened by volatile
categories, like inventories and net exports, and over the past few months, including recent data
revisions, consumers appear to have pulled-back on goods spending through April. Still,
consumer services spending has remained strong, and residential activity and business
investment in equipment and intangibles strengthened.
So far this year, payroll employment has increased at a strong pace through April, partly
reflecting increased immigrant labor supply. Although we have seen signs that the labor market
is coming into better balance, progress has slowed. Recent employment reports continue to show
a tight labor market, and the unemployment rate remains below 4 percent, with the number of job
openings relative to unemployed workers still above its pre-pandemic level. Throughout last
year, the average pace of job gains slowed, and the labor force participation rate rose, but in
recent months, job growth has rebounded. Labor force participation flattened out around last
year’s peak, which suggests no further improvement in labor supply along this margin, as labor
force participation among those aged 55 and older has been persistently low.
At its current setting, our monetary policy stance appears to be restrictive, and I will
continue to monitor the incoming data to assess whether monetary policy is sufficiently
restrictive to bring inflation down to our target. As I’ve noted recently, my baseline outlook
continues to be that inflation will decline further with the policy rate held steady, but I still see a
number of upside inflation risks that affect my outlook.

-3First, much of the progress on inflation last year was due to supply-side improvements,
including easing of supply chain constraints; increases in the number of available workers, due in
part to immigration; and lower energy prices. It is unclear whether further supply-side
improvements will continue to lower inflation. Geopolitical developments could also pose
upside risks to inflation, including the risk that spillovers from regional conflicts could disrupt
global supply chains, putting additional upward pressure on food, energy, and commodity prices.
There is also the risk that the loosening in financial conditions since late last year and additional
fiscal stimulus could add momentum to demand, stalling any further progress or even causing
inflation to reaccelerate.
Finally, there is a risk that strong consumer demand for services, increased immigration,
and continued labor market tightness could lead to persistently high core services inflation.
Given the current low inventory of affordable housing, the inflow of new immigrants to some
geographic areas could result in upward pressure on rents, as additional housing supply may take
time to materialize. Wage growth has remained at an elevated rate of about 4 to 5 percent, still
higher than the pace consistent with our 2 percent inflation goal given trend productivity growth.
In light of these risks, and the general uncertainty regarding the economic outlook, I will
continue to watch the data closely as I assess the appropriate path of monetary policy. The
frequency and extent of data revisions over the past few years make the task of assessing the
current state of the economy and predicting how the economy will evolve even more
challenging. I will remain cautious in my approach to considering future changes in the stance
of policy.
It is important to note that monetary policy is not on a preset course. My colleagues and I
will make our decisions at each FOMC meeting based on the incoming data and the implications

-4for and risks to the outlook. While the current stance of monetary policy appears to be at a
restrictive level, I remain willing to raise the target range for the federal funds rate at a future
meeting should the incoming data indicate that progress on inflation has stalled or reversed.
Restoring price stability is essential for achieving maximum employment over the longer run.
Bank Regulatory Reform
Turning to the bank regulatory reform agenda, there has been a significant volume of
matters that have recently been completed, that have been proposed, and that are in the pipeline.
A number of these efforts have been met with criticism and public resistance, from informal
comments and ad campaigns to formal legal challenges, including litigation challenging the
validity of these reforms. Reasonable minds can disagree on the appropriate path forward for
bank regulatory policy, but the current period of regulatory reform feels more contentious than in
the past.
The current regulatory agenda is notable for its broad scope, both for the institutions that
would be subject to reforms, and the nature of the reforms. The proposals touch on a wide range
of topics that directly or indirectly impact banks of all sizes. And they often represent significant
shifts in regulatory requirements and supervisory expectations. My remarks today highlight two
themes related to the significant number of regulatory changes and proposals under
consideration.
First, the volume and scope of revisions affect a wide range of banking activities and
pose significant challenges for all bankers. Reviewing, understanding, and then implementing
these reforms will involve bank management, compliance, legal, audit, and even frontline staff.
At the same time, banks must also balance the existing and ongoing compliance obligations to
meet supervisory expectations. Compliance has always been an important bank function, and it

-5often involves a shared responsibility and obligation across many different business lines and
personnel. Simply keeping up with the thousands of pages of new regulatory reforms poses a
significant challenge, especially for banks with small staffs and a single compliance officer.
Those same staff members, with already heavy compliance responsibilities, are also often
best positioned to provide feedback on pending regulatory proposals. Banker comments shared
as part of the administrative rulemaking process help inform and influence proposals that are
under consideration. If there is a desire to influence change, stakeholders must engage and
provide input during this process.
Second, the large number of finalized, proposed, and potential changes suggest a lack of
prioritization—whether we have effectively identified actual risks to the banking system and
devoted resources to the most pressing of these issues. Prioritization is something I have spoken
about at length in the past, and it remains just as critical today.2
The banking stress last spring revealed the presence of flaws and shortcomings in our
bank regulatory and supervisory framework. A lack of prioritization in our approach risks losing
focus on making substantively responsive adjustments and reforms.
Opportunities for Engagement
Reviewing and commenting on regulatory proposals should never be a distraction from a
banker’s core responsibility to ensure the bank continues serving its customers in a safe and
sound manner, and in compliance with applicable laws. So, I do not want any of you to take my
remarks today as a call to drop everything you are doing and open up the Federal Register and

Michelle W. Bowman, “Remarks on the Economy and Prioritization of Bank Supervision and Regulation” (speech
at the New York Bankers Association’s Financial Services Forum, Palm Beach, FL, November 9, 2023),
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bowman20231109a.pdf; Michelle W. Bowman, “Tailoring,
Fidelity to the Rule of Law, and Unintended Consequences” (speech at the Harvard Law School Faculty Club,
Cambridge, MA, March 5, 2024), https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/files/bowman20240305a.pdf.
2

-6start reading. The banking system is a highly regulated environment, and as you see in your
work every day, requires banks to devote significant resources to compliance. A strong culture
of compliance can help keep your bank safe, and in the aggregate promotes a safe and sound
banking system. Within a bank, virtually everyone has a role to play in promoting that culture of
compliance with applicable law, all while serving your customers.
But stakeholders, including bankers, have an important role in the stewardship of the
banking system that goes beyond compliance—namely, participating in the administrative
rulemaking process. It is critical that you share your views with policymakers on regulatory
reform proposals. All the comments, data, and analysis from commenters enable policymakers
to make informed decisions throughout the rulemaking process, from the initial brainstorming
stage, through the creation of a proposal, and in crafting a final rule.
This feedback is equally critical in understanding how the supervisory process is working
as it evolves over time and incorporates new standards and expectations. Information about the
intended and unintended impacts of reform initiatives is especially informative. Often, privatesector stakeholders are best positioned to understand and explain these impacts, and to identify
gaps in the context, data, and analysis underpinning these initiatives.
I recognize that in some instances, multiple, interrelated proposals out for comment at the
same time complicate or even frustrate the ability to provide meaningful feedback. For example,
the federal banking regulators have proposed significant reforms to capital requirements, while
also proposing new long-term debt requirements for banks with over $100 billion in assets.
While these efforts are on their face distinct, the calibration of such requirements are directly
linked. The calibration of capital requirements is used to set long-term debt requirements.
Therefore, these proposals present challenges not only to regulators, but also to public

-7commenters trying to understand the potential and complete impact of reforms. Even so, I
strongly encourage your participation to inform the rulemaking process.
I will share my views on a few of these proposals, but I certainly do not mean to suggest
that this list is exhaustive. All the proposals could benefit from public feedback.
Bank Mergers and Acquisitions
Some prudential regulators and other policymakers are currently reconsidering the
approach to the review and approval of bank mergers and acquisitions (M&A).3 M&A
transactions allow banks to evolve and thrive in our dynamic banking system and can promote
the long-term health and viability of banks. M&A also ensures that banks have a meaningful
path to transitioning bank ownership. The absence of a viable M&A framework increases the
potential for additional risks, including limited opportunities for succession planning, especially
in smaller or rural communities when zombie banks continue to exist but have no competitive
viability or exit strategy.
The impact of a more restrictive M&A framework affects institutions of all sizes,
including larger institutions that are vying to compete with the very largest global systemically
important banks (G-SIBs). They may choose to pursue M&A to remain competitive with larger
peers who can achieve that growth organically through their sheer scale.
M&A is an important part of a healthy banking system. So, when considering changes to
the framework, I think we need to first identify the problem that needs to be solved, and then ask

Jonathan Kanter, “Merger Enforcement Sixty Years After Philadelphia National Bank” (speech at the Brookings
Institution’s Center on Regulation and Markets Event, Promoting Competition in Banking, Washington, DC, June
20, 2023), https://www.justice.gov/opa/speech/assistant-attorney-general-jonathan-kanter-delivers-keynote-addressbrookings-institution; Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, “Business Combinations Under the Bank Merger
Act: Notice of Proposed Rulemaking,” OCC Bulletin 2024-4, January 29, 2024, https://occ.gov/newsissuances/bulletins/2024/bulletin-2024-4.html; Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, “FDIC Seeks Public
Comment on Proposed Revisions to its Statement of Policy on Bank Merger Transactions,” news release, March 21,
2024, https://www.fdic.gov/news/press-releases/2024/pr24017.html.
3

-8whether any proposed solution is fair, transparent, and consistent with applicable statutes. And
critically, whether the proposed solution has the potential to damage the long-term viability of
the banking system.
Are there identified shortcomings in the current process or standards, and are the
proposed reforms targeted and effective to address these shortcomings? One argument I have
heard about the M&A regulatory approval process is that the lack of application denials
demonstrates that regulators are failing to meaningfully review and pressure test proposals and
have effectively become a rubber stamp. I think this argument lacks a strong foundation. There
is ample evidence that undermines this argument, including the resource demands on institutions
of pursuing M&A activity, and the protracted time it takes to complete the regulatory review and
approval process (and the not insignificant failure rate we see represented in withdrawn
applications).
First, we have to acknowledge that choosing the path of a merger or acquisition is not
undertaken lightly. These transactions require significant upfront and ongoing investment and
commitment of resources. At the outset, this includes finding an appropriate acquisition target,
conducting due diligence, and negotiating the terms of the transaction. Once a target is
identified, the banks must prepare appropriate regulatory filings, engage with regulators during
the application process, and prepare for post-approval business processes including scheduling
necessary and costly systems conversions and customer transition. This is an expensive and
reputationally risky process that bankers and their boards of directors take extremely seriously.
Second, one would expect to see different patterns emerging if regulators were truly
acting as a “rubber stamp” for banking applications. We know from data published by the
Federal Reserve that filing an application does not guarantee approval, even in the absence of a

-9regulatory denial. The Federal Reserve’s most recent report on banking applications activity
identifies a significant portion of bank M&A transactions in which applications have been
withdrawn.4
The processing timelines we see also seem inconsistent with a process that is operating
truly as a rubber stamp. To be clear, I think we have room to do better when it comes to timely
regulatory action, while maintaining a rigorous review of applications. But extended review
periods are not uncommon, particularly when you include preliminary discussions and pre-filings
with regulators in the published processing timelines.
Some contemplated regulatory reform efforts will likely make the M&A application
process slower and less efficient. One of the key risks to an effective process is a lack of timely
regulatory action. The consequences of delays can significantly harm both the acquiring
institution and the target, causing greater operational risk (including the risk of a failed merger),
increased expenses, reputational risk, and staff attrition in the face of prolonged uncertainty.
Reducing the efficiency of bank M&A can be a deterrent to healthy bank transactions—
limiting activity that preserves the presence of community banks in underserved areas,
preventing institutions from pursuing prudent growth strategies, and undermining competition by
preventing firms from growing to a larger scale, effectively creating a “protected class” of larger
institutions.
Unfortunately, the past year has shown that regulatory attention is increasingly focused
on other issues, with the timeliness of regulatory action appearing to be lower on the list of

4

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Banking Applications Activity Semiannual Report, June 1–
June 30, 2023, vol. 10, no. 2 (Washington: Board of Governors, September 2023),
https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/semiannual-report-on-banking-applications-20230929.pdf. This
report notes that in the first half of 2023, 46 M&A applications were approved by the Federal Reserve, while 12
such applications were withdrawn.

- 10 priorities. However, I would like to highlight a change that may have significant impacts on
M&A transactions depending on how the requirement is implemented.
The Federal Reserve recently proposed changes to its M&A application forms, the FR Y3 and FR Y-3F, to include a requirement that an applicant submit an integration plan at the time
of the initial application.5 Many applications often include plans for integration, as this can
factor into the consideration of an application’s likelihood of approval. However, depending
upon how this requirement is implemented, it could result in significantly increased upfront costs
and burdens for banks in preparing for and submitting applications for mergers and acquisitions,
particularly for smaller institutions.
It is important for industry participants to provide comments on changes to the bank
merger process—including changes to application forms—especially since cost and timing
implications could affect a bank’s consideration of these transactions. Ultimately, while banks
are mindful of and do plan for integration, I am concerned that increased upfront requirements
may lead to additional delays in processing timelines. I would therefore encourage industry
stakeholders to review and provide comment on the proposed changes to our applications forms.
Third-Party Risk Management
Similarly, the agencies also recently released a guide for community banks regarding
third-party risk management.6 This guide took the agencies nearly a year to finalize after
adopting third-party risk management guidance in June of last year. I am hopeful that this
community bank guide will be helpful to community banks. But I have yet to be convinced that

5

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Proposed Agency Information Collection; Comment Request,
89 Fed. Reg. 34,246 (April 30, 2024), https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2024-04-30/pdf/2024-09274.pdf.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Third-Party Risk Management: A Guide for Community
Banks,” SR letter 24-2 / CA letter 24-1 (May 7, 2024),
https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/srletters/SR2402.pdf.
6

- 11 the guide will effectively reduce the burden on smaller banks to comply with our third-party risk
management guidance. Since it is not yet clear that this guide will be effective, I encourage
banks to provide feedback on the guide, including on the clarity and transparency of supervisory
expectations for community banks in their management of third-party risk.
Review of Regulations under the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act
Finally, I’d like to highlight another opportunity for stakeholders to provide feedback on
the agencies’ regulations. In February, the Board announced the initiation of its review of its
regulations to identify those regulations that are outdated, unnecessary, or overly burdensome in
accordance with the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (EGRPRA). It
is my expectation that this review, and eventually the accompanying report to Congress, will
provide a meaningful process for stakeholders and the public to engage with the banking
agencies in identifying regulations that are no longer necessary or are overly burdensome.
As a part of the comment process, I would encourage the public, particularly community
banks, to comment on the aggregate burden imposed on banks since the prior EGRPRA report 10
years ago. While there are many competing priorities on your time, these are valuable
opportunities for you to shape the outcome of our regulations. I welcome the opportunity to
learn from all stakeholders how the Board and the other banking agencies could reduce burden,
especially for regional and community banks.
Prioritization within Bank Regulation and Supervision
I would also like to spend a few minutes on prioritization of regulatory actions. In my
view, it is essential that regulators appropriately calibrate and prioritize supervisory and
regulatory actions. Failing to do so could distract banks, bank management, supervisors, and
regulators from focusing on key risks.

- 12 The frenzy of regulatory reform activity we have seen over the past year raises a question
as to whether the banking regulators are pursuing reforms in a prioritized way. Many reform
proposals do not appear targeted to identified shortcomings or deficiencies in the existing
regulatory framework.
While regulators often identify evolving conditions and emerging risks before they
materialize as pronounced stress in the banking system, too often regulators fail to take
appropriately decisive measures to address them. In addition, regulators can also fall into the
trap of getting distracted from core financial risks, and instead focus on issues that are tangential
to statutory mandates and critical areas of responsibility. Focusing on risks that pose fewer
safety and soundness concerns increases the risk that regulators miss other more foundational
and pressing areas that require more immediate attention. Our recent actions suggest this could
be the case, and that we have taken steps that could distract bank management from focusing on
important and key risks.
The Board’s focus on climate guidance is one example, but it is not the only example.
While climate change is an important issue, climate change is not a core risk to the safety and
soundness of financial institutions. The lessons learned from supervisory failures during the
bank stress last spring clearly illustrate that bank examiners and bank management should focus
on core issues, like credit risk, interest rate risk, and liquidity risk.
I am concerned that focusing our regulatory reform and guidance efforts on issues like
climate change that do not represent core banking risks will only serve to further distract bank
management and supervisors.
In addition to issuing interagency supervisory guidance to banks on managing climaterelated financial risks, the Board recently issued the results of a pilot climate scenario analysis,

- 13 which was designed to learn about large banks’ climate risk-management practices.7 This report
goes into significant detail on the technical aspects of the scenario analysis and underlying
results.
While exploring even remote risks can help build resiliency for the future, I think the
report itself included some acknowledgment that these exercises may have limited utility in the
short-term for managing risk. For example, the report acknowledges that participants “suggested
that climate-related risks are highly uncertain and challenging to measure,” and that “[t]he
uncertainty around the timing and magnitude of climate-related risks made it difficult . . . to
determine how best to incorporate these risks into [banks’] risk-management frameworks on a
business-as-usual basis.”8 Participants also noted that scenario design choices, assumptions, data
challenges, and modelling challenges all played a material role in the analysis.
Banks already have ongoing obligations to manage all material risks, and while scenario
analysis generally is not intended to be predictive, I think the uncertainty and unreliability of the
results from this exercise suggest that resources may be better devoted to dealing with more
tangible and immediate financial risks.
We should rightly be concerned about regulatory pressure on a single issue that could
lead to the misallocation of risk-management resources away from risks that may be more
material, such as interest rate, liquidity, and cyber risks.

7

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Pilot Climate Scenario Analysis Exercise: Summary of
Participants’ Risk-Management Practices and Estimates (Washington: Board of Governors, May 2024),
https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/csa-exercise-summary-20240509.pdf.
8

Pilot Climate Scenario Analysis Exercise, pp. 1-2.

- 14 Closing Thoughts
We continue to be at an inflection point in the bank regulatory reform agenda. The
pending proposals, including the Basel III capital proposal, the G-SIB surcharge, new long-term
debt requirements, amended resolution plan guidance, contemplated changes to the regulatory
approval of merger and acquisition activity, and revisions to the interchange fee cap will have a
lasting impact on banks of all sizes and their current and future customers.
My hope is that you and other interested stakeholders play an active role in this process
by sharing your views and concerns with regulators. This input provides valuable insights into
the specific impacts—intended and unintended—of changes to the bank regulatory framework.
Voicing your concerns enables us to identify, and where needed, address, the real-world
consequences of regulatory and supervisory reforms. Without your participation, we cannot
fully appreciate the impacts of our regulatory and supervisory changes.
Thank you, and I look forward to our discussion.

