For release on delivery
8:30 a.m. EDT
June 4, 2025

Welcoming Remarks

by
Lisa D. Cook
Member
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
at
Fed Listens Event
hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
Atlanta, Georgia

June 4, 2025

Thank you, President Bostic. And thank you to all of you who came out to join
the Federal Reserve today. It is so wonderful to be back in my home state of Georgia. I
was born and raised 100 miles down the road in Milledgeville, I have been an Atlanta
baseball fan since Hank Aaron was swatting the baseball out of Fulton County Stadium
(any Atlanta fans here?), and I have spent a lot of time here in Atlanta, including when I
attended Spelman and Georgia Tech. 1
The Federal Reserve has been given a dual mandate of maximum employment
and stables prices. The purpose of today’s Fed Listens event is to hear from all of you
about how the Federal Reserve’s approach to monetary policy affects your families, your
businesses, and your communities. I appreciate your interest in our work. Events like
these provide valuable information to Fed policymakers, like President Bostic and me.
The Federal Reserve System is really designed to be part of the communities we serve.
The Fed has a Reserve Bank in every region of the U.S., and those Banks have Branches
that carry out many important functions, including making sure the priorities and
concerns on a local level are reflected in monetary policy decisions made in Washington.
As an economist, I am always studying incoming data and information to make
the best policy decisions. Much of that comes in the form of statistics from various
agencies, universities, and businesses. But another extremely valuable input comes from
people, like you, who can tell us how the economy is playing out in their daily lives as
they make purchases, consider investments, and think about employment choices. That is
why I especially value these opportunities.

The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal
Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.

1

-2This Fed Listens event is specifically tied to the review of our long-run goals and
strategy for monetary policy, which we call our framework. 2 It was last updated five
years ago. At that time, it was determined that it makes sense to regularly revisit the
framework through a public review. Thank you for being part of this today. Again, the
primary purpose of this event is to listen to you all, so I will stop here.
Thank you. I look forward to hearing your input.

For more information, see the Federal Reserve Board’s website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-andcommunications-2025.htm.
2

