For release on delivery
12:35 p.m. EDT
October 22, 2025

Brief Remarks

by
Michael S. Barr
Member
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
(via pre-recorded video)
at
Opportunity Finance Network Conference

Washington, D.C.

October 22, 2025

Let me thank the Opportunity Finance Network for the invitation to be part of this
gathering. 1 Unfortunately, I could not join you in person, but I’m pleased to be able to
offer a few words to celebrate the legacy of Community Development Financial
Institutions (CDFIs)—a legacy rooted in opportunity, innovation, and commitment to
communities that have too often been overlooked.
I’m deeply grateful to so many of you who are carrying forward that mission—
building on the work of pioneering leaders who saw finance not just as a set of markets,
but as a means for broad-based economic inclusion.
I’ve had the privilege of being a part of the CDFI story myself. Early on, while at
the Treasury Department, I worked with colleagues to help stand up the CDFI Fund,
strengthen the Community Reinvestment Act, and launch the New Markets Tax Credit.
When I returned to Treasury years later, I got a chance once again to work with the
talented staff of the CDFI Fund, people whose dedication to expanding economic
opportunity was truly inspiring. And over the last three decades, and now at the Federal
Reserve, I’ve seen firsthand how CDFIs around the country help small businesses to
thrive and communities to prosper.
CDFIs emerged as a creative solution to a fundamental challenge: how to get
credit flowing into places where mainstream finance has not always reached. Through
flexible underwriting, tailored lending, and deep community development relationships,
CDFIs meet credit needs through good times and bad. CDFIs help fuel the revitalization
of neighborhoods, small businesses, and local economies.

The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal
Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.

1

-2When I travel around the country as a Fed Governor, I often meet with local
community leaders, including local CDFIs. I’ve seen CDFIs serving rural areas, such as
the Mississippi Delta, where CDFIs have stepped in as traditional bank branches have
closed. I’ve heard small businesses in urban areas such as Atlanta praise the work of
CDFIs helping them get access to capital, skills development, and business opportunities
that were otherwise unavailable. I’ve seen countless examples of CDFIs helping to build
affordable housing, daycare centers, and revitalize neighborhoods, in communities from
Hartford, Connecticut to Dallas, Texas.
CDFIs operate all over the nation, including in Indian Country. The Federal
Reserve’s Center for Indian Country Development has done remarkable work
documenting the power of CDFIs in Native communities. Some of the solutions they’ve
designed include seasonal payment structures for fishermen and loggers, accepting tribal
distribution payments as collateral, or creating land buy-back loans. One Native CDFI
leader described their work as “blending culture with finance”—and I think that captures
beautifully what makes the CDFI model so powerful.
And when economic downturns come—as they inevitably do—CDFIs are often
the first to step up. During the foreclosure crisis, they maintained lending and provided
critical support to homeowners who otherwise could not or would not be served. When
the COVID-19 pandemic hit, CDFIs once again acted as first responders, rapidly
delivering relief to small businesses.
CDFIs have earned their strong track record through performance and results —
delivering impact in rural areas, urban neighborhoods, and tribal communities across the
country. Demand for their services continues to grow.

-3The story of the CDFI movement is one of persistence, creativity, and
partnership—qualities that will serve us well in the years ahead. Together, we can build
on this strong foundation to ensure that opportunity reaches every community and that
the legacy of inclusive finance continues for generations to come.
Thank you for your leadership, your commitment, and for the work you do every
day to make that vision a reality.

