For release on delivery
8:45 a.m. EDT
May 19, 2025

Liquidity Facilities: Purposes and Functions

Remarks by
Philip N. Jefferson
Vice Chair
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
at
“Financial Intermediation in Transition: How Will Policy Adapt?”
2025 Financial Markets Conference, sponsored by
the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
Fernandina Beach, Florida

May 19, 2025

Thank you, President Bostic, for that kind introduction and for the opportunity to
talk to this group today. 1 I am delighted to be here, and I look forward to discussions at
this important conference.
The theme of today’s conference is developments in financial intermediation and
potential implications for monetary policy. As this conference embarks on a larger
discussion of the role of banks and nonbanks in various market segments—including
credit markets, Treasury and money markets, and payments—I believe it is worth taking
a step back to explore an important background factor, which is how and why central
banks provide liquidity.
The provision of liquidity by central banks is a foundational element of financial
intermediation. Central banks should be able to provide liquidity effectively for the
financial system to function smoothly. Today, I will take this opportunity to discuss
some aspects of liquidity provision by the central banks. Of course, the main forms of
liquidity provided by central banks—namely, currency and bank reserves—are the
foundation of safe liquidity in the economy. It is vital for a central bank to make clear
that it stands ready to provide liquidity should stress emerge. But a central bank must
also take steps to minimize moral hazard. “Moral hazard” in this context refers to the
concern that publicly provided liquidity might encourage private financial institutions to
take on excessive risk.
What I would like to focus on in this speech are two types of liquidity provision
that aim to reduce the frictions associated with the basic operations of banks. The first
type of liquidity is intraday credit, which is key in handling payment system frictions
The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal
Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.

1

-2during the day, and the second one is overnight credit, which deals with a range of
frictions. 2 I will also highlight some design features of broadly similar liquidity facilities
in three other advanced economies: the U.K., Japan, and the euro area. I believe it is
valuable to look at other central banks’ experiences with liquidity provision, which
entails recognizing the important differences that exist across jurisdictions and mandates
and considering what lessons can be learned.
At their core, liquidity facilities support the smooth operation and stability of the
banking system, the effective implementation of monetary policy, and the furtherance of
a safe and efficient payment system. This activity in turn supports the flow of credit to
businesses and households. Last year, the Federal Reserve Board issued a public request
for information (RFI) seeking to identify operational frictions in these facilities, and those
comments are under review. I hope that today’s discussion about how facilities operate
in the U.S. and around the globe can further that dialogue among participants at this
conference.
How It Works in the U.S.
Let me start by discussing how liquidity provisions work in the U.S., as
summarized in slide 3. Banks maintain deposit accounts at the Federal Reserve (Fed).
The balances in these accounts, known as reserves, are the most liquid assets that banks
have and are used to meet payment flows as households and business customers of banks
carry out their regular business. Banks often experience mismatches in the timing of
payment inflows and outflows, which could occasionally cause the balance in a bank’s

I refer to primary credit lending as overnight lending for simplicity even though banks are able to borrow
for maturities of up to three months. The vast majority of primary credit lending is overnight. See
Jefferson (2024a) and (2024b) for a summary of the evolution of the discount window.

2

-3account at the Fed to become negative. To help institutions manage this mismatch and
promote the smooth functioning of the payment system, the Fed extends intraday credit,
also known as daylight overdrafts.
Intraday credit facilities provide temporary credit to depository institutions such
as commercial banks and credit unions to foster the smooth functioning of the payment
system. If a bank temporarily lacks the funds to process payments, it can use intraday
credit to avoid delaying payments until it has sufficient liquidity. The Fed provides
intraday credit on both a collateralized and an uncollateralized basis. Collateralized
intraday credit is provided free of charge, whereas uncollateralized credit incurs a fee.
Since this type of credit is provided on an intraday basis, the Fed expects banks to have
positive balances in their accounts by the end of the operational day. If a bank has a
negative balance at the end of day, it incurs an overnight overdraft and pays a penalty.
The Fed also provides overnight credit through the discount window to approved
counterparties against a broad range of collateral. This type of liquidity provision is
designed to mitigate short-term misallocations of liquidity. For example, a bank may
need to settle a large payment at the end of the day, but it may temporarily have
insufficient funds in its account to do so. To meet the payment obligation, the bank could
borrow in private interbank markets—in which financial institutions lend funds to each
other on a short-term basis—or from the central bank. The rate on overnight credit also
helps central banks with monetary policy implementation. In addition, overnight
liquidity facilities often serve as a first line of defense against stresses, and they stand
ready to provide liquidity when institutions face outflows.

-4All discount window loans are collateralized, and a wide range of bank assets,
including a variety of loans and securities, are eligible to serve as collateral. 3 The Fed
operates three separate facilities under the discount window: primary credit, secondary
credit, and seasonal credit.
The first one, primary credit, is available to generally sound banks at a rate that is
currently set at the top of the target range for the federal funds rate. Providing liquidity at
this rate supports the implementation of monetary policy because institutions can turn to
the Fed if conditions tighten in money markets that might otherwise push overnight
money market rates above levels that would be consistent with the Fed’s target range. As
I noted earlier, primary credit also helps deal with idiosyncratic funding challenges that
banks might be experiencing. Most of the funding provided is on an overnight basis;
however, funding is available for up to 90 days.
The next one, secondary credit, is available to banks that are not sufficiently
healthy to have access to primary credit. It is available at a higher rate, features higher
haircuts on collateral, and is limited to overnight credit. 4

Examples of assets that may serve as collateral include, but are not limited to, U.S. Treasury securities,
investment-grade corporate bonds, U.S. government agency-backed mortgage securities, commercial and
industrial loans, commercial real estate loans, agricultural loans secured by farmland, one- to four-family
mortgage loans, and auto loans. For more detail on assets that may serve as collateral, please see Federal
Reserve Banks (n.d.), “Collateral Eligibility – Securities and Loans,” Discount Window Direct,
https://www.frbdiscountwindow.org/pages/collateral/collateral_eligibility.
4
The Fed lends less than the fair market value of the collateral provided to manage the credit risk
associated with its lending operations. For example, if a bank needs a loan of $100, a portfolio of securities
valued at $200 may be required to be posted if the discount or haircut associated with that portfolio is
50 percent. The difference between the amount that the Fed will lend on a particular asset and the fair
market value of that asset reflects the haircut, or margin. These haircuts differ, for instance, with the
historical price volatility and credit risk associated with the asset. Information on the haircuts for different
assets may be found at Federal Reserve Banks (n.d.), “Collateral Valuation,” Discount Window Direct,
https://www.frbdiscountwindow.org/pages/collateral/collateral_valuation.
3

-5The third facility, seasonal credit, provides short-term liquidity to smaller
institutions that experience sizable seasonal fluctuations in their balance sheets.
Typically, these are banks located in agricultural or tourist areas.
Short-Term Credit Provision across Jurisdictions
Looking at central banks’ experiences across jurisdictions provides useful insights
about different approaches to providing liquidity. 5 Central banks choose a combination
of interest rates, collateral requirements, collateral valuation practices, and other design
features to encourage usage of facilities while minimizing undesired consequences—in
particular, moral hazard. For example, a central bank facility that provides liquidity at an
attractive interest rate could be very effective in ensuring that shocks to the financial
system do not disrupt the flow of credit but may potentially increase moral hazard. If that
facility only accepted a narrow set of high-quality collateral, however, then the moral
hazard associated with it could be reduced. Alternatively, the usage of a facility that
charges an interest rate above the market rate (a so-called penalty rate) is likely limited,
but if the facility accepted a broad range of collateral, usage can be encouraged. 6 In these
two examples, the counterbalancing choices are with respect to the interest rate charged
and the eligible collateral. Different central banks might prefer one approach over the
other depending on specific aspects of their frameworks and banking systems.
Of course, there are challenges in comparing liquidity facilities across
jurisdictions given important differences with respect to central banks’ legal authorities,

See Arseneau and others (2025).
A penalty rate in the Board’s emergency lending regulation is defined as a rate that is higher than the
market rate in normal circumstances, affords liquidity in unusual and exigent circumstances, and
encourages repayment of the credit and discourages use of the program or facility as the unusual and
exigent circumstances that motivated the program or facility recede and economic conditions normalize.
See Regulation A—Extensions of Credit by Federal Reserve Banks, 12 CFR pt. 201.4(d)(7) (2024).

5
6

-6monetary policy frameworks, the size of the economy and financial sector, and
institutional structures. This divergence is also true across the four advanced economies
that I will consider today: the U.S., the U.K., Japan, and the euro area. There can be
large differences in each jurisdiction’s banking sector and central bank balance sheets
relative to the size of their economies, highlighting the need to use caution when
comparing aspects of their liquidity provision.
With that caveat in mind, let’s look at the design features of some foreign central
bank liquidity facilities that are fairly similar to the Fed’s discount window. As shown in
figure 1, the Bank of England (BOE) operates two such short-term facilities: an
operational standing facility and a discount window. The operational standing facility
features lower rates but restricts acceptable collateral to high-quality, highly liquid
sovereign debt. The discount window facility accepts a broader range of collateral but
charges a higher rate.
Which facility an eligible borrower turns to in the U.K. depends on the sorts of
collateral that are being pledged. In the U.S., whether an institution has access to primary
or secondary credit depends on the condition of the borrower. The BOE monitors
borrower conditions, and the Fed also sets haircuts on collateral based on asset riskiness.
The differences in design considerations could influence how eligible borrowers integrate
these facilities into their regular liquidity management practices.
The Bank of Japan (BOJ) has two facilities: one that provides overnight loans
and another that provides somewhat longer-term funding up to three months. Because
the BOJ has been operating a system with a very large supply of reserves for some time,
its lending facilities tend not to be used extensively, other than in stress periods.

-7The European Central Bank (ECB) operates a marginal lending facility quite
similar to the Fed’s discount window. It can meet the idiosyncratic funding needs of
individual banks and serves as a ceiling on interbank rates and thus helps the ECB
implement monetary policy. This facility is an important element of the ECB framework
even though the ECB’s approach to monetary policy implementation involves providing
the banking system with a sizable amount of reserves through weekly (repo) lending
operations. 7
The international differences show that central banks can accomplish their
objectives using facilities with quite different designs. As I noted earlier, one of the vital
purposes of a short-term liquidity facility is to be able to provide support to the banking
systems during stress. The Fed, the BOE, the BOJ, and the ECB have been able to do so.
Figure 2 shows short-term credit provision over time for the four central banks: the BOJ,
the green line; the Fed, the black line; the ECB, the blue line; and the BOE, the red line. 8
Each line is the monthly short-term credit outstanding as a share of central bank assets in
2019. This figure illustrates a few important points.
First, at most times, use of the short-term central bank liquidity facilities is
modest. Second, central bank provision of short-term liquidity can increase very rapidly
during times of stress. 9 For example, the Fed and the ECB provided substantial shortterm liquidity during the 2007–09 financial crisis. Third, the figure also illustrates that
stress is not always global in nature and peak usage does not necessarily coincide. For

See Isabel Schnabel (2024), “The Eurosystem’s Operational Framework,” speech delivered at the Money
Market Contact Group meeting, Frankfurt, Germany, March 14,
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2024/html/ecb.sp240314~8b609de772.en.html.
8
Values in figure 2 represent the marginal lending facility for the euro area, the complementary lending
facility for Japan, the operational standing lending facility for the U.K., and primary credit for the U.S.
9
See Jefferson (2024a) for a longer historical perspective on the Fed’s liquidity provision over time.
7

-8instance, short-term liquidity provision rose in the euro area during the European
sovereign debt crisis that began in late 2009 and peaked in 2012, but it did not increase
much in the U.S. Similarly, short-term liquidity provision increased in the U.S. during
the March 2023 banking stress episode, but it did not increase in the euro area. I also
want to highlight that during stress events, central banks complement their regular shortterm standing liquidity facilities with other facilities. Therefore, stress events may not
necessarily result in an increase in liquidity provision through a short-term standing
facility.
Now let’s turn to more recent developments. Over the past few years, as central
banks have shrunk their balance sheets, liquidity has been gradually reduced, which has
made the existing liquidity provision tools more relevant. The BOE and the ECB have
indicated that they are moving toward operating frameworks in which short-term
liquidity providing repo operations will play a key role. 10
The Fed has stated that it will continue to operate in an ample-reserves regime. In
this regime, the primary credit rate is positioned to be slightly above the rate expected to
prevail in interbank markets so use of the discount window should typically remain
modest. Still, the facility remains available to be used. Figure 3 shows the discount
window credit as a share of Fed assets over the past decade. As you can see from this
figure, over the past few years, the discount window has been used more than was the
case before the pandemic. Increased usage may be due to the discount rate being set

See, for example, B (2024), “Transitioning to a Repo-Led Operating Framework,” discussion paper
(London: BOE, December 9), https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/paper/2024/dp/transitioning-to-a-repoled-operating-framework.
See, for example, Schnabel, “The Eurosystem’s Operational Framework,” The Eurosystem’s operational
framework.
10

-9closer to private market rates than was the case before the pandemic, the availability of
longer maturity loans, and shifts in communication.
Intraday Credit Provision across Jurisdictions
Just as there are differences with respect to the provision of overnight liquidity
across central banks, there are also differences in the provision of intraday credit. One
difference is with respect to unresolved intraday overdrafts. As I noted earlier, it is
possible for banks to incur overnight overdrafts if they fail to take such action as
requesting an overnight loan, although overnight overdrafts are not considered business
as usual and carry a penalty rate in the U.S., currently set at the primary credit rate plus
400 basis points. 11 The BOJ does something quite similar. By charging a high penalty
on overnight overdrafts, both the Fed and the BOJ discourage overdrafts.
In contrast to the Fed and the BOJ, the ECB and the BOE can automatically
convert most of the intraday overdrafts into an overnight loan from the business-as-usual
facility seamlessly, without action on the part of the bank, against the same collateral at
the end of the day. 12 That feature creates a greater similarity between intraday credit and
overnight credit in those jurisdictions. The relationship between intraday credit and
overnight credit is going to be an important one for central banks amid developments in
payment systems, including advances in technology and the expansion of payment
system operating hours.

See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2023), Federal Reserve Policy on Payment
System Risk, (Washington: Board of Governors), p. 33,
https://www.federalreserve.gov/paymentsystems/files/psr_policy.pdf.
12
The BOE is a special case because, for most institutions, intraday overdrafts are seamlessly converted
into an overnight loan if the institution signed up to use the operational standing facility in advance.
Institutions that have not signed up in advance and end the day with an overdrawn reserve account face an
overdraft charge of 2 percent plus the Bank Rate or another rate set at discretion.
11

- 10 Conclusion
Today, I provided an overview of the Fed’s provision of liquidity through the
discount window and intraday credit and highlighted some similarities and differences
across jurisdictions. In summary, the Fed’s discount window and intraday credit facilities
have many features that are similar to those found in other central bank facilities. While
differences in institutional, legal, and financial system structures across jurisdictions
make central bank short-term lending context specific, looking at the experiences of
central banks across other jurisdictions is informative, as central banks share similar
goals and face similar challenges when it comes to liquidity provision.
The Fed is continually assessing and striving to improve the operational aspects of
discount window and intraday credit. The Federal Reserve System has made several
important advancements to ensure that liquidity provision meets the needs of the
21st century economy. For example, Reserve Banks have worked to streamline the use
of electronic files when establishing access to the discount window and made
technological advancements in the process for requesting a discount window loan. The
Federal Reserve System launched a convenient online portal called “Discount Window
Direct” for requesting and prepaying discount window loans that is generally accessible
to banks 24–7. To improve familiarity with the discount window, Reserve Banks have
conducted outreach to banks and made efforts to guide them in using the program.
To complement these efforts, the Board issued an RFI last September seeking
input on the operations of the discount window and intraday credit. Any issues identified
in the responses to the RFI can help the Fed understand further improvements that may
promote efficiency and reduce the burden on banks.

- 11 I look forward to hearing insights you may have into central banks’ liquidity
facilities and how these issues intersect with the topics that will be discussed at this
conference. Thank you!

- 12 References
Arseneau, David, Mark Carlson, Kathryn Chen, Matt Darst, Dylan Kirkeeng, Elizabeth
Klee, Matt Malloy, Benjamin Malin, Emilie O’Malley, Friederike Niepmann,
Mary-Frances Styczynski, Melissa Vanouse, and Alexandros P. Vardoulakis
(2025). “Central Bank Liquidity Facilities around the World,” FEDS Notes.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 26,
https://doi.org/10.17016/2380-7172.3740.
Jefferson, Philip N. (2024a). “A History of the Fed’s Discount Window: 1913–2000,”
speech delivered at Davidson College, Davidson, North Carolina, October 8,
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/jefferson20241008a.htm.
Jefferson, Philip N. (2024b). “The Fed’s Discount Window: 1990 to the Present,”
speech delivered at the Charlotte Economics Club, Charlotte, North Carolina,
October 9,
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/jefferson20241009a.htm.

Financial Markets Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
Fernandina Beach, Florida
May 19, 2025

Liquidity Facilities: Purposes and
Functions
Philip N. Jefferson
Vice Chair, Federal Reserve Board
Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System
The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal
Open Market Committee.

Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson| Financial Markets Conference | May 19, 2025

Road Map of Talk
• Liquidity facilities and their purposes
• How it works in the U.S.
• Daylight overdrafts
• Discount window
• Short-term credit provision across jurisdictions
• Conclusion

Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson| Financial Markets Conference | May 19, 2025

Federal Reserve Liquidity Provision
Intraday Credit

Short-Term Credit

(Daylight Overdrafts)

(Discount Window)

• Smooths payment mismatches
during the day

• Smooths funding fluctuations
overnight or during short periods

• Provided to banks and other
depository institutions

• Provided to banks and other
depository institutions

• Provided free of charge (if
collateralized)

• Interest rate linked to monetary
policy

• May be uncollateralized

• Always collateralized

Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson| Financial Markets Conference | May 19, 2025

Figure 1. Liquidity Facilities and Their Functions

Source: Arseneau, David, Mark Carlson, Kathryn Chen, Matt Darst, Dylan Kirkeeng, Elizabeth Klee, Matt Malloy, Benjamin Malin, Emilie O’Malley, Friederike Niepmann, Mary-Frances Styczynski, Melissa
Vanouse, and Alexandros P. Vardoulakis (2025). "Central Bank Liquidity Facilities around the World," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 26, 2025.

Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson| Financial Markets Conference | May 19, 2025

Figure 2. Short-Term Liquidity Provision across Central Banks

Note: Data extend through Dec. 2024. U.S. values are for primary credit only. Usage is end-of-month values, except BOE which is the monthly average of daily values. Central bank assets are as of Dec.
31, 2019.
Source: European Central Bank (ECB), Marginal Lending Facility; Bank of Japan (BOJ), Complementary Lending Facility; Bank of England (BOE), Operational Standing Lending Facility; Federal Reserve
(Fed), Primary Credit; via FRED.

Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson| Financial Markets Conference | May 19, 2025

Figure 3. Discount Window Usage as a Share of Federal
Reserve Assets

Note: Stress periods during COVID-19 and the March 2023 banking turmoil are truncated at the top of the figure, peaking at 0.97 percent and 1.77 percent, respectively. Month-ends +/- 1 business day
have been filtered out. Data extend through May 14, 2025.
Source: Federal Reserve Board, Statistical Release H.4.1, "Factors Affecting Reserve Balances."

Financial Markets Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
Fernandina Beach, Florida
May 19, 2025

Liquidity Facilities: Purposes and
Functions
Philip N. Jefferson
Vice Chair, Federal Reserve Board
Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System

