For release on delivery
1:10 p.m. EDT (12:10 p.m. local time)
October 11, 2024

Challenges to the Community Banking Model

Remarks by
Michelle W. Bowman
Member
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
at
The 18th Annual Community Bankers Symposium
Community Banking: Navigating a Changing Landscape
Chicago, Illinois

October 11, 2024

Good afternoon, I’d like to begin by thanking the event organizers, including our staff at
the Chicago Federal Reserve Bank, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), the
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors for
inviting me to share my thoughts with you at the 18th Annual Community Bankers Symposium. 1
I always enjoy the opportunity to speak to bankers across the country and share perspectives on
the issues facing the banking and financial system, especially when it’s related to community
banks.
Banks are a critical component of the U.S. economy. 2 Their work often extends well
beyond the provision of credit— providing services and volunteer and financial support within
their community. Among many things, banks offer financial education, sponsorships and
funding for community programs and events. Without question, community banks are important
and integral to the local economy.
But community banks also face challenges that require proactive risk management,
effective and efficient prioritization of compliance resources, and the need to innovate. Today, I
would like to briefly highlight some of the issues banks are facing and discuss ways that
community banks and regulators can more effectively work together in the future.
The Challenges Facing Community Banks
As this audience knows well, community banks face a number of challenges. They often
rely on third-party service providers to offer products and services to their customers. It may be
more difficult for them to hire and retain qualified staff or plan for future leadership with

These remarks represent my own views and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve
Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.

1

See Michelle W. Bowman, “Building a Community Banking Framework for the Future” (speech at the Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis Community Banking Research Conference, St. Louis, MO, October 2, 2024),
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/files/bowman20241002a.pdf.

2

-2management succession planning. Given limited staffing, they may be overwhelmed by the
recent onslaught of new regulations and guidance. And in light of all of this, it may be
challenging to prioritize resources in order to appropriately focus on the most important risks
facing their businesses. While the headwinds may seem overwhelming, community banks are
always resilient in the face of change.
Often, one of the greatest challenges facing a community bank is not about managing any
particular risk but rather how to address all of the risks they face—and how to prioritize the
approach to address each of those risks. Regulators have, at times, exacerbated these challenges
through policy choices. The risk of mis-prioritization is not limited to community banks. In my
mind, this was most recently evident in the events and supervision leading to the failure of
Silicon Valley Bank. Management failed to address growing interest rate risk and funding risks,
and supervisors failed to prioritize and escalate these issues. Our goal should be to identify,
understand, and learn from these past mistakes, and to avoid repeating them.
Both regulators and banks should be working toward a common goal—a banking system
that supports economic activity throughout the country, in which banks operate in a safe and
sound manner and in compliance with consumer laws and regulations. In considering the
challenges facing community banks, both regulators and banks have an important role to play.
Competition
Community banks face competitive pressures from many sources. These pressures may
result from local or regional economic conditions, the needs of retail and business customers, and
the products and services available in the market. Competitors can take the form of traditional
banks, internet banks, and non-banks like fin-techs and mortgage companies. While fin-tech
partnerships can be beneficial to both the customer and the bank, if the relationship is not

-3managed according to safe and sound banking principles, serious problems can result. When
deposits are accepted through fin-tech relationships but not handled appropriately, deposit
insurance can be jeopardized and the ability to access deposited funds may be impacted. 3
Competition can also come from other local competitors like credit unions, large banks
with a broader operational footprint, payday lenders, or other nonbank credit sources. As bank
customers grow increasingly comfortable and familiar with new mechanisms for doing business,
the use of online banking has continued to expand. This has tended to increase the footprint of
non-local banks or lenders, enabling them to effectively compete for business outside of their
geographic area. Even against this backdrop, research shows that community banks have
maintained an important role in many banking markets, including in small- and medium-sized
business lending. 4
The regulatory framework establishes expectations for how community banks can
compete, and often creates an unlevel playing field with many of these competitors. This
includes whether they are subject to the same regulation as banks that engage in the same
activities and how competition is evaluated.
A core concept in financial regulation is to impose the same regulation—and I suggest we
expand this to include the same regulation, guidance, and supervisory expectations—on entities
that are engaged in the same activities. Banks compete against many non-bank providers,
including financial technology firms, credit unions, and other non-bank lenders. In some of

See, e.g., Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Arkansas State Bank Department, “In the Matter of
Evolve Bancorp, Inc. and Evolve Bank & Trust, Cease and Desist Order,” news release, June 11, 2024,
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/files/enf20240614a1.pdf.

3

Allen N. Berger, Nathan H. Miller, Mitchell A. Petersen, Raghuram G. Rajan, and Jeremy C. Stein, “Does
Function Follow Organizational Form? Evidence from the Lending Practices of Large and Small Banks,” National
Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 8752 (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research,
February 2002), https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w8752/w8752.pdf.
4

-4these head-to-head competitions, community banks face distinct disadvantages that can pose
challenges when competing for the same banking opportunities. For example, banks are subject
to taxes and additional regulatory requirements (including the Community Reinvestment Act).
They are also subject to a broader range of restrictions imposed by regulatory requirements or
the “soft” power of supervision. In all of these cases, the disparity in the legal framework can
have a distortive effect on competition. In short, where the financial regulatory framework can
provide for parity of treatment, it should do so. The regulatory framework should not knowingly
distort competition, or effectively impose a regulatory allocation of credit.
The framework also plays an important role in assessing competition among banks. The
mergers and acquisitions (M&A) approval process can have a disproportionate impact on
community banks because the “screens” that are used to evaluate the competitive effects of a
proposed merger often result in a finding that M&A transactions in rural markets can have an
adverse effect on competition and should therefore be disallowed. 5 Even when these transactions
are eventually approved, the mechanical approach to analyzing competitive effects—which is
grounded in the effect of proposed transactions on the control of deposits within individual
banking markets—often requires additional review or analysis, and can lead to delays in the
regulatory approval process.
Cybersecurity
Community banks often note cybersecurity and third-party risk management as areas that
raise significant concerns. Cyber-related events, including ransomware attacks and business

Michelle W. Bowman, “The Role of Research, Data, and Analysis in Banking Reforms” (speech at the 2023
Community Banking Research Conference, St. Louis, MO, October 4, 2023),
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/files/bowman20231004a.pdf; Michelle W. Bowman, “The New
Landscape for Banking Competition,” (speech at the 2022 Community Banking Research Conference, St. Louis,
MO, September 28, 2022), https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/files/bowman20220928a.pdf.
5

-5email compromises, are costly and time-consuming experiences, and they pose unique
challenges for community banks. For example, the maintenance of and the technology resources
required to support a successful cybersecurity program are often difficult for smaller banks.
Regulators can promote cybersecurity, and stronger cyber-incident “resilience” and response
capabilities by identifying resources and opportunities for banks to develop “muscle memory” in
cyber incident response.
Recent incidents, like the Crowdstrike-related outage, have highlighted the heavy
dependence many banks have on technology, third-party providers, and the broader supply chain.
In the current risk environment, it is important for banks of all sizes to implement sound
operational resilience, cybersecurity, and third-party risk-management practices. One important
resource for community banks is the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC)
website, which includes the FFIEC Cybersecurity Resource Guide and links to other external
cybersecurity resources.
The Federal Reserve plays an important role in supervising banks and supporting risk
management practices. For example, the Federal Reserve hosts the Midwest Cyber Workshop,
with the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago, Kansas City, and St. Louis. 6 Over the past two
years, this workshop has provided a forum to further cyber risk discussions among community
bankers, regulators, law enforcement, and other industry stakeholders. Today’s Symposium also
includes an interactive cyber workshop, during which participants will participate in a cyber

See Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, and Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City, Midwest Cyber Workshop 2024 (June 25-26, 2024), https://www.chicagofed.org/events/2024/midwest-cyberworkshop.
6

-6exercise, working through the various decisions that would be required in responding to a
hypothetical cyberattack. 7
We know well that cyber threats pose real risks to the banking system. We also
recognize that community banks may have unique needs in preventing, remediating, and
responding to cyber threats. Therefore, regulators should ensure that a range of resources are
available to support community banks and seek further opportunities to help build community
bank resilience against these threats.
Third-Party Risk Management
Third-party risk management can pose an additional challenge for community banks.
Due to their size and scale, community banks often leverage centralized resources—technical
experts who have greater expertise than the bank could fully maintain on staff—to advise and
assist on a range of issues. Often these third-party service providers are significantly larger, and
their bank clients—including smaller banks—may lack leverage in conducting due diligence and
negotiating the terms of the relationship.
In 2023, the federal banking agencies published supervisory guidance addressing thirdparty risk management, which was expressly applicable to community banks. As I noted at the
time it was issued, the guidance included shortcomings that were known and identified but not
addressed in advance. 8

Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Community Bankers Symposium (October 11, 2024),
https://www.chicagofed.org/events/2024/annual-community-bankers-symposium-18th

7

Michelle W. Bowman, “Defining a Bank” (Speech to the American Bankers Association 2024 Conference for
Community Bankers, San Antonio, TX, February 12, 2024),
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/files/bowman20240212a.pdf; Statement by Governor Michelle
W. Bowman, “Third-Party Risk-Management Guidance,” news release, June 6, 2023,
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bowman-statement-20230606.htm (“...Federal Reserve
regional bank supervisors have indicated that we should provide additional resources for community banks upon
implementation to provide appropriate expectations and ensure that small banks understand and can effectively use
8

-7What many of you may not know is that after nearly a year from the original publication,
the regulators published a guide to assist community banks interpret and apply the guidance to
their third-party risk management activities. The guide was intended to provide additional
context for the guidance—including step-by-step examples of how to address third-party risk
management—making the guidance more useful. While I am pleased that the community bank
implementation guide was eventually published, the delays in its publication suggest a
shortcoming in our regulatory approach. We must ensure new guidance provides clarity to
regulated firms on its own, or that we provide additional resources at the time the guidance is
published.
Consumer Compliance
Like third-party risk management, consumer compliance can be another area that may
present challenges to community banks given their size and scale. An effective and well-run
consumer compliance program balances consumer protection with the complexity and cost to
establish a robust compliance management program. One challenge for community banks is the
difficulty in retaining qualified consumer compliance experts. Notwithstanding these challenges,
community banks devote significant time and resources to their consumer compliance risk
management programs. Compliance with consumer protection laws and regulations, including
fair lending laws, is essential to ensuring that the banking system provides fair and broad access
to credit and financial services.
Community banks take these responsibilities seriously, and the overwhelming majority of
banks that we supervise invest in strong compliance management systems to prevent violations

the guidance to inform their third-party risk management processes…I am disappointed that the agencies failed to
make the upfront investment to reduce unnecessary confusion and burden on community banks”).

-8and detect problems before they occur. When consumer compliance concerns arise, banks
address them by making their customers whole and adopting the necessary changes to ensure that
issues do not persist or reoccur. In a very small subset of cases, banks fall short of their
obligations, and we hold those institutions accountable through enforcement actions or other
supervisory actions.
The Federal Reserve’s consumer compliance supervision program is risk-focused and
tailored to a bank’s compliance risk, focused on the activities that present the greatest risk. One
example related to third-party risk management is our recent system supervisory focus on
consumer compliance risks associated with fin-tech relationships. As a result of this work, our
supervisors seek to identify the parties to relationships that pose the greatest risk of consumer
harm. This effort promotes our understanding of higher risk fin-tech partners across the Federal
Reserve System, and helps supervisors proactively identify relationships that pose greater risk of
consumer harm.
Other Core Risks
There are a number of “core” risks that are essential for bank management to address.
These “core” risks—including funding, liquidity and credit risk—should already be integrated
into management priorities, since they pose the greatest threats to a bank’s operations.
Focusing on core risks is second nature for community banks. In contrast, supervision
can be susceptible to diversion from core to non-core risks leading supervisors to neglect the
build-up of traditional risk. Diverting resources to non-core risks can often leave a bank
vulnerable, especially when regulators direct banks to allocate resources in other ways, whether
by regulation, guidance, or through supervisory expectations.

-9Mitigating Risks to Community Banks
The design of regulation, guidance, and supervisory approach regulators rely upon for
community banks—and the intentional policy choices that underpin this framework—are
important for ensuring their effectiveness in supporting the safety and soundness of the banking
system. These design choices can enable community banks to operate successfully while
mitigating risks, leveraging tailoring, transparency, and consistency across institutions. 9 I have
spoken at length about these themes in the past, but I would like to reiterate just a few of the
critical elements of a regulatory agenda that will allow community banks to thrive in the future:
•

First, we need to revisit size thresholds over time as inflation and economic growth
slowly erode our regulatory categories. The bank regulatory framework is built largely
upon asset-based size thresholds, and these thresholds should reflect a deliberate policy
choice. But, over time, these fixed thresholds effectively result in more firms being
“scoped in” to higher compliance tiers over time, even when there has been no change in
a bank’s underlying risk profile. 10

•

We need to have a regulatory system in which M&A transactions and de novo bank
formations are possible for banks, not one in which regulatory approval requirements are
used to impose additional (and extra-regulatory) requirements on firms. 11 Viable
formation and merger options for banks of all sizes are necessary to avoid creating a

See Michelle W. Bowman, “Building a Community Banking Framework for the Future” (speech at the Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis Community Banking Research Conference, St. Louis, Missouri, October 2, 2024),
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/files/bowman20241002a.pdf.

9

See, e.g., Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office
of the Comptroller of the Currency, “Regulatory Capital Rule: Large Banking Organizations and Banking
Organizations with Significant Trading Activity,” 88 Fed. Reg. 64,028, 64,095 (September 18, 2023) (“[t]o reflect
inflation since 1996 and growth in the capital markets, the agencies are proposing to increase the trading activity
dollar threshold [applicable to the market risk rule] from $1 billion to $5 billion.”).

10

11
FDIC, “Final Statement of Policy on Bank Merger Transactions,” (September 17, 2024),
https://www.fdic.gov/system/files/2024-09/final-statement-of-policy-on-bank-merger-transactions.pdf.

- 10 “barbell” of the very largest and very smallest banks in the banking system, with the
number of community banks continuing to erode over time. Left unchecked, an
applications process that imposes additional costs and delays on healthy and appropriate
banking transactions will result in a reduction in available credit and services, an increase
in the number of unbanked or underbanked communities, and economic harm.
•

We should prioritize direct experience in our regulatory efforts, giving greater voice and
opportunities for input from policymakers with banking or state supervisory experience
currently at the Federal banking agencies, and by soliciting and accepting feedback from
our state banking counterparts. Greater coordination and participation by a wider set of
policymakers in regulatory reform efforts would bring several benefits. For example,
discussion of competing ideas and compromise in the drafting of regulatory proposals
often results in a more moderate approach, reducing dramatic swings of the regulatory
pendulum. And in many instances, we can better anticipate the unintended consequences
of reform proposals if policymakers engage in good faith discussions and coordination of
these efforts.

•

While regulatory reform brings many benefits, we should also shift our mindset to focus
on the tradeoffs of regulation, guidance, and supervision. Changes to the regulatory
framework often yield benefits in terms of greater visibility into the workings of the
banking system, additional capital that can absorb losses and promote financial
resiliency, and more conservative risk-management standards for interest rate risk and
funding risk. But we need to evaluate not only the benefits of proposals but also the costs
and unintended consequences. How will banks adjust their activities in response? Will
they raise prices on lending activities or for other banking products or services? Will

- 11 they exit certain low-margin businesses, resulting in greater concentration and increased
financial stability risk? By considering the cumulative burden, we can better address and
acknowledge these concerns.
•

And finally, we must incorporate “tailoring”—calibrating the regulatory framework
based on the size and complexity of banks’ activities—as a required input for regulatory
consideration. Tailoring helps us to better allocate finite resources both in banks and
among regulators and helps us avoid threatening the long-term viability of community
banks by simply adding to the mass of existing regulations, guidance, and other
supervisory material. We simply cannot ignore the “cumulative” or “compounding”
effect of increasing the complexity of the regulatory framework and we must make room
in our reform agenda for the unglamorous work of “maintenance” in promoting an
efficient framework.

By no means is this proposal for regulatory reform exhaustive, but these critical components
must be integrated into our future approach to ensure a diverse banking system for the future.
Closing Thoughts
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today, and for your commitment to
community banking. You serve a critical role within the banking system, and in support of the
U.S. economy. Your work to leverage the power of the community banking model enables you
to serve your customers, promote financial inclusion and expand access to banking services. But
policymakers have an important responsibility to make sure that the community banking model
remains viable into the future. To function effectively, the banking system requires the presence
of banks of all sizes—larger, regional, and community banks. This diversity of our financial

- 12 institutions is the greatest strength of our banking system, and it can easily be imperiled by
insufficiently targeted regulation, supervision, and guidance.

