For release on delivery
9:00 a.m. EST
November 8, 2021

Flexible Average Inflation Targeting and Prospects for U.S. Monetary Policy

Remarks by
Richard H. Clarida
Vice Chair
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
at the
Symposium on Monetary Policy Frameworks
The Brookings Institution
Washington, D.C.
(via webcast)

November 8, 2021

Outlooks and Outcomes for the U.S. Economy
The U.S. economy in the second quarter of this year made the transition from
economic recovery to economic expansion.1 Given the catastrophic collapse in U.S.
economic activity in the first half of 2020 as a result of the global pandemic and the
mitigation efforts put in place to contain it, few forecasters could have expected—or even
dared to hope—in the spring of last year that the recovery in gross domestic product
(GDP), from the sharpest decline in activity since the Great Depression, would be either
so robust or as rapid. In retrospect, it seems clear that timely and targeted monetary and
fiscal policy actions—unprecedented in both scale and scope—provided essential and
significant support to the economic recovery as it got under way last year. Indeed, the
National Bureau of Economic Research’s Business Cycle Dating Committee determined
in July that the recession that began in March of last year ended in April, making it not
only the deepest recession on record, but also the briefest. 2 The recovery that
commenced in the summer of 2020 was quite robust, and, with one quarter to go, GDP
growth in 2021 is projected by the Fed and many outside forecasters to be the fastest
since 1983. However, it must be noted that the course of the economy this year and
beyond will depend on the course of this virus. That said, under the median projection
for GDP growth in the September Summary of Economic projections, the level of real
GDP will have returned to its pre pandemic trend growth trajectory by the fourth quarter

1

The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or
Federal Open Market Committee participants. I would like to thank Burcu Duygan-Bump and Chiara
Scotti for assistance in preparing these remarks.
2
See National Bureau of Economic Research (2021).

-2of 2021, which if realized would represent one of the most rapid such recoveries in 50
years.3
In the September SEP round, my individual projections for GDP growth, the
unemployment rate, inflation, and the policy rate path turned out to be quite close to the
path of SEP medians for each of these variables over the 2021–24 projection window.
Under these projections, GDP growth steps down from 5.9 percent this year to
3.8 percent in 2022 and further to 2.5 percent and 2 percent in 2023 and 2024,
respectively. Not surprisingly, the projected path of above-trend GDP growth in 2021
and 2022 translates into rapid declines in the projected path for the unemployment rate,
which is projected to fall to 3.8 percent by the end of 2022 and 3.5 percent by the end of
2023. This modal projection for the path of the unemployment rate is, according to the
Atlanta Fed jobs calculator, consistent with a rebound in labor force participation to its
estimated demographic trend and is also consistent with cumulative employment gains
this year and next that, by the end of 2022, eliminate the 4.2 million “employment gap”
relative to the previous cycle peak. 4
My projections for headline and core PCE (personal consumption expenditures)
inflation are, alas, also similar to the median SEP numbers. Under the projected SEP
path for inflation, core PCE inflation surges to at least 3.7 percent this year before
reverting back to 2.3 percent in 2022, 2.2 percent in 2023, and 2.1 percent in 2024. Thus,
the baseline outlook for inflation over the three-year projection window reflects the
judgment, shared with many outside forecasters, that under appropriate monetary policy,

3

The most recent SEP, released following the conclusion of the September 2021 FOMC meeting, is
available on the Board’s website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.
4
More information on the jobs calculator can be found on the Atlanta Fed’s website at
https://www.atlantafed.org/chcs/calculator.

-3most of the inflation overshoot relative to the longer-run goal of 2 percent will, in the
end, prove to be transitory. But as I have noted before, there is no doubt that it is taking
much longer to fully reopen a $20 trillion economy than it did to shut it down. Although
in a number of sectors of the economy the imbalances between demand and supply —
including labor supply—are substantial, I do continue to judge that these imbalances are
likely to dissipate over time as the labor market and global supply chains eventually
adjust and, importantly, do so without putting persistent upward pressure on price
inflation and wage gains adjusted for productivity. But let me be clear on two points.
First, realized PCE inflation so far this year represents, to me, much more than a
“moderate” overshoot of our 2 percent longer-run inflation objective, and I would not
consider a repeat performance next year a policy success. Second, as always, there are
risks to any outlook, and I and 12 of my colleagues believe that the risks to the outlook
for inflation are to the upside.
Prospects for U.S. Monetary Policy
In September 2020, the FOMC introduced—and since then has reaffirmed—
outcome-based, threshold guidance that specifies three conditions that the Committee
expects will be met before it considers increasing the target range for the federal funds
rate, currently 0 to 25 basis points.5 This guidance in September of last year brought the
forward guidance on the federal funds rate in the statement into alignment with the new
flexible average inflation targeting framework adopted in August 2020. 6 To quote from

5

The FOMC statements containing the guidance (see the fourth paragraph in each statement) are available
on the Board’s website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.
6
The revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, unanimously approved on
August 27, 2020, is available on the Board’s website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-

-4the statement, these conditions are that “labor market conditions have reached levels
consistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation has
risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time.”
While we are clearly a ways away from considering raising interest rates, if the
outlooks for inflation and unemployment I summarized a moment ago turn out to be the
actual outcomes realized over the forecast horizon, then I believe that these three
necessary conditions for raising the target range for the federal funds rate will have been
met by year-end 2022.7 Core PCE inflation since February 2020—a calculation window
that smooths out any base effects resulting from “round trip” declines and rebounds in the
price levels of COVID-19-sensitive sectors and, coincidentally, also measures the
average rate of core PCE inflation since hitting the effective lower bound (ELB) in March
2020—is running at 2.8 percent through September 2021 and is projected to remain
moderately above 2 percent in all three years of the projection window. Moreover, my
inflation projections for 2023 and 2024, which forecast inflation rates similar to the SEP
medians, would by year-end 2022, to me, satisfy the “on track to moderately exceed 2
percent for some time” threshold specified in the statement. Finally, while my
assessment of maximum employment incorporates a wide range of indicators to assess
the state of the labor market—including indicators of labor compensation, productivity,
and price-cost markups—the employment data I look at, such as the Kansas City Fed’s
Labor Market Conditions Indicators, are historically highly correlated with the

communications-statement-on-longer-run-goals-monetary-policy-strategy.htm. For a discussion of the
elements that motivated the launch of the review and a summary of the key changes that were introduced,
see Clarida (2020, 2021) and Powell (2020).
7
Of course, data for December 2022 employment and 2022:Q4 GDP and PCE inflation will not be released
until January 2023.

-5unemployment rate.8 My expectation today is that the labor market by the end of 2022
will have reached my assessment of maximum employment if the unemployment rate has
declined by then to the SEP median of modal projections of 3.8 percent.
Given this economic outlook and so long as inflation expectations remain well
anchored at the 2 percent longer-run goal—which, based on the Fed staff’s common
inflation expectations (CIE) index, I judge at present to be the case—a policy
normalization path similar to the median SEP dot plot on page 4 of our September 2021
projections would, under these conditions, be entirely consistent, to me, with our new
flexible average inflation targeting framework and the policy rate reaction function I
discussed in remarks here at Brookings in November 2020.9 In the context of our new
framework, it is important to note that while the ELB can be a constraint on monetary
policy, the ELB is not a constraint on fiscal policy, and appropriate monetary policy
under our new framework, to me, must—and certainly can—incorporate this reality.
Indeed, under present circumstances, I judge that the support to aggregate demand from
fiscal policy—including the roughly $2 trillion in accumulated excess savings accruing
from (as yet) unspent transfer payments—in tandem with appropriate monetary policy,
can fully offset the constraint, highlighted in our Statement on Longer-Run Goals and
Monetary Policy Strategy, that the ELB imposes on the ability of inflation-targeting
monetary policy, acting on its own and in the absence of sufficient fiscal support, to

The Labor Market Conditions Indicators can be found on the Kansas City Fed’s website at
https://www.kansascityfed.org/data-and-trends/labor-market-conditions-indicators.
9
The Fed staff’s CIE index—which is now updated quarterly on the Board’s website—is a relevant
indicator that this goal is being met. See Ahn and Fulton (2020, 2021).
8

-6restore, following a recession, maximum employment and price stability while keeping
inflation expectations well anchored at the 2 percent longer-run goal.10
Before I conclude, let me say a few words about our Treasury and mortgagebacked securities (MBS) purchase programs. In our December 2020 FOMC statement,
we indicated that we would maintain the pace of Treasury and MBS purchases at $80
billion and $40 billion per month, respectively, until “substantial further progress” has
been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Since then, the
economy has made progress toward these goals. At our meeting last week, the
Committee decided to begin reducing the monthly pace of its net asset purchases by $10
billion for Treasury securities and $5 billion for agency mortgage-backed securities.
Beginning later this month, the Committee will increase its holdings of Treasury
securities by at least $70 billion per month and of agency mortgage‑backed securities by
at least $35 billion per month. Beginning in December, the Committee will increase its
holdings of Treasury securities by at least $60 billion per month and of agency mortgage backed securities by at least $30 billion per month. The Committee judges that similar
reductions in the pace of net asset purchases will likely be appropriate each month, but it
is prepared to adjust the pace of purchases if warranted by changes in the economic
outlook. The Federal Reserve’s ongoing purchases and holdings of securities will
continue to foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions,
thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses.

10

For a theoretical analysis of the fiscal and monetary policy mix at the ELB, see Woodford and Xie
(2020). For studies of the government expenditure multiplier at the ELB, see Woodford (2011); Christiano,
Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011); and Eggertsson (2011).

-7Thank you very much for your time and attention. I look forward to the
conversation with Ben Bernanke, Philip Lane, and Rachana Shanbhogue.

-8References
Ahn, Hie Joo, and Chad Fulton (2020). “Index of Common Inflation Expectations,”
FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
September 2, https://doi.org/10.17016/2380-7172.2551.
——— (2021). “Research Data Series: Index of Common Inflation Expectations,”
FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
March 5, https://doi.org/10.17016/2380-7172.2873.
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo (2011). “When Is the
Government Spending Multiplier Large?” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 119
(February), pp. 78–121.
Clarida, Richard H. (2020). “The Federal Reserve’s New Framework: Context and
Consequences,” speech delivered at “The Economy and Monetary Policy,” an
event hosted by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the
Brookings Institution, Washington (via webcast), November 16,
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/clarida20201116a.htm.
——— (2021). “The Federal Reserve’s New Framework and Outcome-Based Forward
Guidance,” speech delivered at “SOMC: The Federal Reserve’s New Policy
Framework,” a forum sponsored by the Manhattan Institute’s Shadow Open
Market Committee, New York (via webcast), April 14,
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/clarida20210414a.htm.
Eggertsson, Gauti B. (2011). “What Fiscal Policy Is Effective at Zero Interest Rates?” in
Daron Acemoglu and Michael Woodford, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual
2010, vol. 25 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 59–112.
National Bureau of Economic Research, Business Cycle Dating Committee (2021).
“Determination of the April 2020 Trough in US Economic Activity,”
announcement, July 19, https://www.nber.org/news/business-cycle-datingcommittee-announcement-july-19-2021.
Powell, Jerome H. (2020). “New Economic Challenges and the Fed’s Monetary Policy
Review,” speech delivered at “Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for
Monetary Policy,” a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 27,
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/powell20200827a.htm.
Woodford, Michael (2011). “Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure
Multiplier,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, vol 3 (January),
pp. 1–35.
Woodford, Michael, and Yinxi Xie (2020). “Fiscal and Monetary Stabilization Policy at
the Zero Lower Bound: Consequences of Limited Foresight,” NBER Working

-9Paper Series 27521. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research,
July, https://www.nber.org/papers/w27521.

