For release on delivery
4:00 p.m. EDT (3:00 p.m. local time)
October 22, 2025

Brief Remarks

by
Michael S. Barr
Member
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
(via pre-recorded video)
at
Crossing the Credit Barrier: Advancing Access and Creating Opportunities Conference

St. Louis, Missouri

October 22, 2025

Good afternoon and thank you to the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Boston,
Richmond, and Philadelphia for hosting today’s discussions. 1 You have organized a
dynamic conversation on topics that have a significant bearing on the financial well-being
of consumers and communities.
Financial inclusion and access to credit have been a long-standing focus of my
work and a key component of the Federal Reserve’s mission. The Fed has an important
role in implementing a series of laws passed by Congress related to access to credit,
including the Community Reinvestment Act. Today, I will share my perspective on the
critical role that bank accounts, faster payments, and small-dollar loans can play in
serving the needs of low- and moderate-income communities.
The ability to manage personal financial decisions safely and dependably begins
with access to a bank account. One program that has been successful in expanding
account access is Bank On, supported by the Cities for Financial Empowerment Fund
(CFE Fund). Bank On accounts certified by the CFE Fund meet standards including low
minimum deposits for account opening and low maintenance, overdraft, and other
unexpected fees. The Bank On National Data (BOND) Hub, hosted by the Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, is a critical data set that helps us understand how financial
institutions are expanding access to low-cost banking for consumers. 2 It also helps us
better understand how this access directly benefits different households in numerous
ways.

The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal
Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
2
See https://www.stlouisfed.org/community-development/bank-on-national-data-hub/about-data-hub.
1

-2Beyond account access, innovations such as more efficient payments systems,
small dollar loans, and underwriting loans using alternative data, such as cash flows
facilitate greater financial inclusion for consumers.
The ability to move money faster can empower households by providing them
with more control over financial inflows and outflows—receiving their income and
paying their bills. Better control over their financial lives can reduce knock-on effects
from financial volatility, particularly for low-to-moderate income households with less
financial slack.
Likewise, products like bank-offered small-dollar loans can provide affordable,
short-term liquidity to cover emergencies and unexpected expenses. Data from the Fed’s
2024 Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking provide insights into how
households might handle a small-dollar liquidity need. The short answer is it would be
tough for many households. When asked how they would respond if confronted with an
unexpected $400 expense, nearly 20 percent of adults said they would have paid at least
in part by selling something, using a payday loan, deposit advance, or overdraft. When
looking at households with incomes of under $25,000, this number increased to 46
percent. 3
A bank-offered small-dollar loan could provide help to these households. Some
banks have begun offering small-dollar loans that are partially or wholly underwritten
using alternative financial data, such as cash-flows, including deposits, paying rent and
utilities, and the like. This type of underwriting can help assess the creditworthiness of

Federal Reserve Board staff analysis of survey results, published in the Economic Well-Being of U.S.
Households in 2024 (Federal Reserve Board, May 2025),
https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/2024-report-economic-well-being-us-households202505.pdf.

3

-3consumers with thin or no credit files. Additionally, cash-flow underwriting can help
banks offer a “second look” for consumers who would otherwise not qualify based on
more traditional credit-score-based underwriting models. Beyond expanding the pool of
eligible consumers, loans underwritten using alternative financial data can lead to less
expensive and faster loan underwriting. A safe, reasonably priced, and transparent smalldollar loan could help consumers better navigate the burden of emergency expenses.
I’ve mentioned a few ways that financial services can help improve the financial
health of low-and moderate-income households—through safe and affordable bank
accounts, faster payments, and small-dollar loans. Thank you for the work you are doing
to understand how to better serve households and small businesses in a wide variety of
ways. Better access to financial services can help communities to thrive. I hope to see
continued collaboration among the Federal Reserve System and myriad stakeholders,
including all of you. Through our shared efforts, we can continue to advance financial
inclusion for all communities. Thank you.

