For release on delivery
7:30 a.m. EDT (1:30 p.m. local time)
September 29, 2025

The Next Frontier of Payments Innovation
Remarks by
Christopher J. Waller
Member
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
at
Sibos 2025

Frankfurt, Germany

September 29, 2025

Thank you for inviting me to speak here today. 1 The theme for Sibos this year, “the next
frontiers of global finance” is a fitting one. We are indeed witnessing a new frontier of
innovation in payments and the broader financial system. New technologies like distributed
ledgers, tokenized assets, smart contracts, and artificial intelligence (AI) have the potential to
make payments smarter, faster, and more efficient. I know many of you in the audience today
represent firms that are using the latest cutting-edge advances to bring new global solutions to
the market.
The conference theme also accurately captures that we are at the next frontier. I often
note that the modern history of payments is a story of technological innovation. 2 The history
spans from the last century, when payments and securities transfers were converted from paper
to electronic solutions, to the present day when we increasingly have payment systems that
process transactions in real time, 24/7.
Lastly, the conference theme recognizes the global nature of payments and financial
infrastructures that underpin international commerce. Of particular focus in this domain are
cross-border payments, which involve transactions across a layered and complex set of networks
and experience frictions that contribute to higher costs, slower speeds, limited transparency, and
barriers to access. Multiple opportunities for improvement exist in international payments,
including improvements to smaller-value remittances, business-to-business payments, and
collateral management in capital markets.

Thank you to Alex Sproveri, Kirstin Wells, and Priyanka Slattery of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance
in preparing this text. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the
Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
2
See Christopher J. Waller, “Technological Advancements in Payments,” speech delivered at the Wyoming
Blockchain Symposium, Teton Village, WY, August 20, 2025,
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/files/waller20250820a.pdf.
1

-2-

As we enter the next frontier, let us remember that this is not a new story and that we
should not fear new technologies, nor new types of providers. Instead, we should ask how new
technologies could benefit all types of actors, including the most sophisticated financial firms as
well as consumers, while not losing sight of the need for guardrails that promote safety for
consumers and the broader financial system. In addition, we should ask how new technologies
could be used to upgrade the infrastructures that serve as critical components to the global
financial system, in a way that maintains and extends safety and resilience. These are the topics
I will consider today.
Choice and competition
I approach these issues fundamentally as an economist and as a firm believer in the free
market. In particular, I would highlight the importance of choice in how markets function and
how competition develops. In general, choices encourage competition, leading to better quality
products and services. Businesses innovate to differentiate products, including by incorporating
new technical capabilities. This improves market responsiveness to consumer demand.
Businesses also incorporate new technologies to compete on cost and efficiency. I see
stablecoins, for example, as simply another choice available to consumers and businesses, where
they have signaled a need in the market to further improve payments. 3 I believe that we must
take this articulated need seriously and respect the ability of the private sector to develop
solutions.
This dynamic is nothing new. Market participants have long had choices in the types of
payment instruments they use. Public and private forms of money coexisting, in multiple forms,

See Christopher J. Waller, “Reflections on Stablecoins and Payments Innovations,” speech at “Planning for
Surprises, Learning from Crises” 2021 Financial Stability Conference, Cleveland, OH, November 17, 2021,
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/waller20211117a.htm.

3

-3-

is in fact a common feature in all developed economies. In the United States, consumers have
had central bank money in the form of cash, commercial bank money in the form of deposits in a
bank account, and nonbank money (or “e-money”) in the form of a funds balance on a nonbank
payment app. Stablecoins are simply a new form of private money and will exist alongside these
other payment instruments, provided consumers accept them as safe, low-risk assets with
regulatory protections. 4
Consumers and businesses have for decades also had a choice of providers of payment
services and financial products including banks, card networks, nonbank payment service
providers, and, more recently, other fintechs. Having a choice of providers is important because
needs and preferences vary among consumers and businesses. I may choose one provider if I
want to park my emergency fund in a high-yield savings account, and I may choose different
providers if I want to process a cross-border payment, pay someone with a QR code, or buy a
crypto-asset. A choice of providers also encourages competition on cost, speed, efficiency, and
user experience.
Additionally, firms have options for payments and financial infrastructure, which is
important because firms might choose to route money or securities on different rails depending
on business needs. Some may value speed; some may prefer the ability to batch payments and
settle on net to capture liquidity savings. Some will prefer the features of a centralized financial
market infrastructure and its built-in regulatory guardrails; some may prefer to transact on public
blockchains, with different models for achieving security and integrity. Having multiple options
is also good for public policy objectives like promoting resilience across the broader payment
system.

4

See Christopher J. Waller, “Reflections on Stablecoins and Payments.”

-4-

Assessing benefits of the next frontier of innovations
Given this backdrop of new technologies and new entrants within a competitive market,
let’s explore how this could lead to positive economic outcomes.
First, will the next frontier of innovations translate to lower costs? An influx of new
market entrants certainly has the potential to drive down costs as they compete for customers,
particularly if blockchain-based transactions prove to be cheaper. If stablecoins present a lower
cost alternative to consumers and businesses, I am all for it. We are already seeing this dynamic
develop outside of the United States, where U.S. dollar stablecoins are an attractive option in
countries in which access to dollar banking services is expensive or limited. We also know that
cross-border payments, in particular remittances, are relatively expensive. This is attributable in
part to the complexity of transactions involving multiple infrastructures, currencies, and
intermediaries. One way in which innovative technologies could translate to lower costs is
through efficiency gains.
This brings me to my second question: how might new technologies improve the
efficiency of the payment system? Distributed ledger technology, or DLT, is rapidly becoming
an efficient infrastructure for 24/7 transactions, recordkeeping, and data management by
enabling multiple platforms, parties, assets, and functions to be combined in new ways. As an
example, DLT-based platforms can support 24/7 real-time payments and securities transfers by
using programmable functionalities like smart contracts to enhance operational efficiency and
automate more complex financial transactions. With the ability to specify the precise time at
which a transaction settles and under what conditions, DLT-based platforms have the potential to
increase the flexibility and efficiency of settlement for money and assets.

-5-

Many cross-border payments today rely on the correspondent banking model—a network
of bilateral banking relationships that enables financial institutions to access foreign financial
systems and to conduct business across jurisdictions without establishing physical and legal
presence in every market they serve. While correspondent banking has been the backbone of
global payments for decades, this model faces several challenges, including high transaction
costs, slower processing times, and a global decline in correspondent banking relationships.
While these frictions are attributed in part to the process of sending payments through a complex
chain of correspondent banks, I should note that not all frictions are barriers to overcome.
Certain frictions are purposely built into the global payment system for compliance and riskmanagement reasons, such as preventing money laundering and countering the financing of
terrorism. 5
DLT-based platforms have the potential to improve upon the existing correspondent
banking model, and private-sector firms are pursuing multiple approaches to do so. One way is
through the “stablecoin sandwich” model, in which fiat currency in one country is converted first
into a stablecoin, then that stablecoin is transferred to another individual, and then converted
back into the local fiat currency at its destination. Another way is through the use of tokenized
deposits, where banks represent deposit liabilities on a blockchain for wholesale and crossborder transactions. Either model has the potential to improve transparency, cost, and timeliness,
while balancing the need for safety and integrity of the transfer. DLT-based platforms generally
(and stablecoins, specifically) may also present opportunities for efficiency gains in remittance
payments, where today, money transfer operators rely on large global networks of agents and
pre-position capital in various currencies to pay out customers in different jurisdictions. These
See Christopher J. Waller, “Interlinking Fast Payment Systems,” speech delivered at the Global Fintech Fest 2024,
Mumbai, India, August 28, 2024, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/waller20240828a.htm.

5

-6-

examples also demonstrate that innovation is not an issue of “TradFi” versus “DeFi,” but rather
poses an opportunity to harness the complementary strengths each has to offer, especially at a
time where we are seeing increased convergence between the two.
Importantly, efficiency will depend on the extent to which DLT networks can
interoperate with one another and with traditional payment rails. This is particularly true
because payments exhibit significant network effects. Fortunately, numerous private-sector
advances in interoperability are emerging given this market need, and as an operator of core
payment and settlement infrastructure, we at the Federal Reserve continue to assess how we can
improve our existing rails that serve private-sector firms.
Let’s turn from DLT to AI. AI can further improve the efficiency of payments in a
number of ways, including through automating manual tasks, detecting fraud or compliance
risks, and now with agentic AI, executing tasks on behalf of a person or company quickly and
cheaply through the use of AI agents. 6 Let’s again take the example of cross-border payments,
which involve multiple jurisdictions, each with its own compliance requirements. Firms are
increasingly exploring AI and machine learning (as well as smart contracts) to automate
compliance activities.
Third, can new technologies and products maintain and build trust in the digital
ecosystem? I believe they can. One common criticism of stablecoins is that they will somehow
undermine the trust in money. Under regulatory frameworks like the GENIUS Act in the United
States, payment stablecoins will be backed at least 1 to 1 with safe, liquid assets and users will be
able to redeem their stablecoins at par. I have long advocated that a right-sized regulatory

For additional discussion on AI in payments, see Christopher J. Waller, “Technological Advancements in
Payments.”
6

-7-

framework can address concerns related to safety and financial stability, while allowing
stablecoins to scale on their own merits. 7
As with any technology, ecosystem operators will need to assess and manage risks,
including cybersecurity. As payments shift to new rails and include stablecoins, tokenized
assets, and smart contracts, new opportunities for cyberattacks will emerge. Achieving security
and resilience means ensuring these digital platforms are hardened against misuse, with
redundancy and safeguards in place that match the scale of domestic and global payments.
Building resilience requires both the private and public sectors to work together on standards,
cybersecurity, and risk management, so that innovation goes hand-in-hand with safety.
Roles of the private and public sectors
This brings me to the roles that the private and public sectors can play at the next frontier
of payments innovation. I often argue that the private sector can most reliably and efficiently
allocate resources and take risks to explore the value of new technologies. 8 The private sector is
also best positioned to serve consumers and provide products and services that meet their needs.
You don’t want the government to decide what technologies are in or out, or decide what
consumers want. Further, the private sector brings a depth and level of technical expertise
required to translate new technologies into practical improvements for payments.
The role of the public sector is to support the private sector in specific circumstances
where that is useful. At the Federal Reserve, that means serving as a convener to solve
coordination problems, providing regulatory clarity when within our specific remit, and

See Christopher J. Waller, “Reflections on a Maturing Stablecoin Market,” speech delivered at A Very Stable
Conference, San Francisco, CA, February 12, 2025,
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/files/waller20250212a.pdf.
8
See Christopher J. Waller, “What Roles Should the Private Sector and the Federal Reserve Play in Payments?”
speech delivered at The Clearing House Annual Conference 2024, New York, NY, November 12, 2024,
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/files/waller20241112a.pdf .
7

-8-

operating core payment and settlement infrastructure that the private sector uses.
Complementary private and public roles can contribute to a safe and efficient payment system.
Looking ahead, I believe it is important to understand how the Federal Reserve can
continue to support private-sector innovation. One way is to conduct research and
experimentation on emerging technologies. At the Federal Reserve, we are conducting hands-on
research on the latest wave of innovations, including tokenization, smart contracts, and AI in
payments. We do this to understand how private-sector innovators will use these to improve
payments, as well as identify any opportunities to upgrade our own payment infrastructures.
Another way is to engage actively with industry on innovations. That is why, in three
weeks, I am convening industry leaders and U.S. policymakers to discuss how to further improve
the payment system. That is also why I appreciate coming to events like Sibos, where industry
experts within the private sector engage with public-sector officials to discuss how we can best
navigate the next frontier of innovations. Thank you.

