Comments on
“Some Benefits and Risks of a Hot
Economy”
Remarks by
Christopher J. Waller
Member
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
February 18, 2022
Views are my own and do not represent any position
of the Board of Governors or other Federal Reserve
policymakers.
1

• The authors discuss three impacts from running a
“hot” economy: labor market inclusiveness,
potential financial market instability and a greater
risk of excessive inflation.
• Since time is short, I will focus most of my comments
on the benefits of labor market inclusiveness.

2

• The Federal Reserve’s new framework states that
“full employment is a broad-based and inclusive
goal.”
• A challenge for policymakers is to try and determine
when that goal has been achieved.
• One interpretation is that it is when all groups have
similar labor market outcomes according to various
metrics.
3

• For example, those metrics could include
unemployment rates, employment-to-population
ratios and labor force participation rates.
• If these metrics do not show similar labor market
outcomes, the question then becomes, “what can
monetary policy do to improve these metrics?”

4

• The evidence from the authors’ research is that
economic expansions show a strong narrowing of
differentials for unemployment rates across groups.
• And, only weak evidence for narrowing of labor
force participation rates.
• This is for prime age workers (25-54)—not very
inclusive to people my age! The good news is I find
it true for prime age and all workers.
5

• What should unemployment rates look like in a
racially blind, gender-neutral labor market?
• In the basic Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides labor
search model, there are only “economic agents.”
Race and gender are not specified.
• Given a certain matching efficiency, job finding and
job separation rate, an equilibrium unemployment
rate is generated.

6

• Let’s arbitrarily assign workers a color: blue, green and
red.
• If these colors are meaningless attributes, then all
groups will have the same unemployment rate and the
ratios will be 1.
• This implies that race and gender ratios should be 1.
• Education ratios, because of differences in productivity,
will not be 1.

7

• By looking at the ratio, we get a measure of relative
differences as opposed to absolute differences.
• Looking at relative differences gives a better view of
improving (or worsening) situations than absolute
differences.
• It measures gains and losses in percentage terms.

8

• Consider income; someone makes $100,000 and
someone else makes $50,000.
• Now double both incomes; the first person will still make
twice as much. So there is no relative change in the
income distribution.
• But in absolute terms, the first person has an extra
$100,000 in income and the other has an extra $50,000.
This looks like a worsening income distribution.

9

• Looking at ratios raises three key questions.
• First, how far are the ratios in the data from 1?
• Second, is there a trend in these ratios toward 1
(improvement) or away from 1 (worsening)?
• Third, do these ratios display cyclical variations that
could be affected by monetary policy?
10

Takeaways:
1) Ratio greater than 1. Race matters.
2) Clear downward trend.
3) Appears to exhibit cyclical pattern after the last three recessions– rises
after a recession then falls later in the recovery.
11

Takeaways:
1) Ratio greater than 1. Race matters.
2) Clear downward trend.
3) No apparent cyclical variation.
12

Takeaways:
1) Ratio slightly less than 1 until recently.
2) No apparent trend.
3) No apparent cyclical variation.
13

Takeaways:
1) Ratio close to 1.
2) No apparent trend after the 1970’s.
3) Some cyclical variation. Women experienced large unemployment at the start of
the COVID shock. Men experienced larger unemployment in previous recessions.
14

Takeaways:
1) Ratio greater than 1 but not surprising.
2) Clear downward trend.
3) No apparent cyclical variation.
15

Takeaways:
1) Ratio greater than 1 but not surprising.
2) No apparent trend.
3) No apparent cyclical variation.
16

Takeaways:
1) Ratio greater than 1 but not surprising.
2) No apparent trend.
3) No apparent cyclical variation.
17

• So what conclusions do I draw from this data?
• First, for Black workers and Hispanics, the ratios are bigger
than one – work is needed to try and lower this to 1.
• Second, there have been clear improvements for less
advantaged groups in terms of longer-term labor market
trends.
• It is unlikely that this type of improvement is directly driven
by monetary policy.

18

• Third, running the economy “hot” does improve the
relative performance for some groups, but not all,
when comparing unemployment rates.
• In particular, longer expansions improve job finding
rates for Black workers.
• Doing a similar exercise using relative employment
to population ratios also shows improvement for
Black and Hispanic workers.

19

Empirical Studies
• Aaronson, Stephanie R., Mary C. Daly, William
Wascher, David W. Wilcox. 2019. “Okun Revisited:
Who Benefits Most From a Strong Economy?”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, 333404.
• Hotchkiss, Julie L. and Robert E. Moore. “Some Like it
Hot: Assessing Long-term Labor Market Benefits
from a High-pressure Economy.” International
Journal of Central Banking (forthcoming)
20

