FT PROFESSIONAL

Federal Reserve

Federal Reserve governor Philip Jefferson nominated as central bank’s vice-chair
Biden also taps economist Adriana Kugler for a seat on board of governors

Philip Jefferson, pictured, will fill a spot left vacant by Lael Brainard, who left earlier this year to join the Biden administration © AP

Colby Smith in Washington
Published MAY 12 2023

Joe Biden on Friday officially nominated Philip Jefferson to serve as the next vice-chair of the
Federal Reserve in his latest step to reshape the top ranks of the US central bank.
The US president also tapped Adriana Kugler, an economist who represents the US on the board of
the World Bank, to become a Fed governor. If confirmed, she would be the first Latina to become a
top policymaker at the Fed.
Additionally, Biden said he would nominate Lisa Cook for a full 14-year term as a Fed governor,
after she became the first black woman to hold the position in the Fed’s history following her
confirmation in May 2022.

In a statement, the president lauded Jefferson and Cook for bringing “valuable insight, expertise,
and continuity to the Fed at a critical time for our economy and families across the country”.
Jefferson will fill a spot left vacant by Lael Brainard, who departed the Fed in February after
serving as second-in-command for less than a year to join the Biden administration as the
president’s top economic adviser.
Biden highlighted Kugler’s “deep expertise” on the jobs market, especially youth employment. She
served as the chief economist of the Department of Labor from 2011 to 2013.
“These nominees understand that this job is not a partisan one, but one that plays a critical role in
pursuing maximum employment, maintaining price stability, and supervising many of our nation’s
financial institutions,” he said.
The rejigging of the most senior positions at the Fed comes at a challenging moment for the central
bank, which is confronting stubbornly high inflation and bouts of financial instability, after the
failure of multiple banks in recent months.
Jefferson, Cook and Kugler, if confirmed, will be instrumental in determining the future direction
of the Fed’s policy path. The central bank has already raised its benchmark rate more than 5
percentage points in a little more than a year. Recession fears have risen in recent months, fuelling
bets that the Fed will slash rates later this year.
Speaking late on Friday, Jefferson acknowledged that progress in bringing down inflation had been
“uneven and slower than any of us would like”. However, he said the effects of the Fed’s efforts to
date to slow down the economy are “still likely ahead of us”, noting that he expects consumer
spending to decelerate this year.
Tighter credit conditions due to the recent bank failures will help to further restrain the economy,
Jefferson added at an event hosted by the Hoover Institution.
Sherrod Brown, the Democratic chair of the powerful Senate banking committee, which will
manage the confirmation process, called the nominations “historic”.

Senator Bob Menendez, a Democrat from New Jersey who has long advocated for more diversity in
top positions at the Fed, applauded the announcement on Friday. “We are finally giving Latinos, all
62mn of us who call this country home, a seat at the table where the most consequential decisions
on monetary policy are made,” he said in a statement.
Some Republicans have criticised the Fed for expanding its territory beyond its congressional
mandate, such as climate change. Last year, Biden’s first pick for vice-chair for supervision, Sarah
Bloom Raskin, was forced to withdraw from the nomination process after losing support for her
previous calls for regulators to more proactively address financial risks related to climate change.
Biden eventually tapped Michael Barr, a former Treasury official.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US politics & policy
Central banks
Federal Reserve
Lisa Cook
Colby Smith

