FT PROFESSIONAL

Unhedged US inflation

Core inflation falls, a lot
And more on bank capital

© Financial Times

Robert Armstrong and Ethan Wu
Published JUL 13 2023

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
This article is an on-site version of our Unhedged newsletter. Sign up here to get the newsletter
sent straight to your inbox every weekday

Good morning. Former retiree Bob Iger has been given a couple more years as “interim” CEO of
Disney, and the ceiling on his bonus pay has been quintupled. This reminds us of an old Peter Arno
cartoon depicting a bunch of ancient gentlemen seated around a long table, wearing wrinkled
grins. The caption: “Then it’s moved and seconded that the compulsory retirement age be advanced
to ninety-five!” Feel young at heart? Email us: robert.armstrong@ft.com and ethan.wu@ft.com.

That disinflation sensation
Although we passed the inflation inflection two months ago, the speed of inflation’s descent has
remained in doubt. Yesterday’s CPI numbers offered reassurance on that front. Core inflation,
which had seemed hot and sticky for six months running, rose less than an annualised 2 per cent in
June. Goldman Sachs called it a “turning point”; for Standard Chartered, it was a “game changer”.
The details looked encouraging, too. Used car prices fell, finally relenting from a shortlived demand
pop. Core goods prices declined slightly. Core services inflation rose a modest 0.25 per cent, in line
with the pre-Covid average. The cooling in core services prices was helped by slower rent inflation.
Newly-signed leases are trickling into the CPI data, which also includes old, peak-inflation leases.
This transition takes time, so the economist Jason Furman uses private market rental data to
simulate where core inflation will settle once CPI finishes catching up. On a six-month annualised
basis, core CPI would be at 2.5 per cent if CPI shelter fully reflected private market rents.
A few notes of caution are needed. Next month’s report may not be so benign on the services side.
Hotels and airfares, two volatile services categories, posted huge price drops, at 2 per cent and 8
per cent month on month, respectively. These will probably reverse. And other services categories
such as vet visits, recreational services, car insurance and repairs are all still running hot (for a
deeper discussion of car insurance inflation, listen to the Unhedged podcast).
But good news is good news. Most encouraging of all, inflation appears to be unsticking. The
indices below measure, in different ways, how broadly entrenched inflation is. All three are
pointing in the right direction, and one is even sporting a 2-handle:

The market was pleased. Falling yields carried stocks gently higher. Calmer inflation means rates
don’t need to go as high, or for as long, as the market had expected. After the CPI report, the
futures market lowered its probability estimate of a second additional rate increase this year (the
one in July still looks all but guaranteed). The two-year yield fell 13 basis points, confirming the
signal from the futures market.
But these were incremental moves, reflecting the incremental information contained in yesterday’s
report. The data did not guarantee a soft landing, but suggested what the path may be. That is:
decelerating job growth plus lower core inflation buys room for the Federal Reserve to go easier.
The chance of that happening is on the rise, but things need to keep going right, so Mr Market is
reserving judgment. As BNP Paribas analysts wrote yesterday, “the market may require either
confirmation of a trend softening in inflation or signs that the labour market is cracking to shift
regimes”.

Two questions linger. One is whether progress on inflation will get harder. Growth is still strong,
the labour market is still tight, and private market rent indices have re-accelerated, suggesting
shelter inflation won’t fall for ever. A second is what the Fed will do if the chances of a soft landing
keep rising. Cut early to stop the lagged effects of policy from derailing the economy? Keep rates
high to make sure the job is done? We’re past halftime for this rates cycle, but there’s plenty of
game left to play. (Ethan Wu)

A reply on bank capital
There were quite a few lively responses to yesterday’s piece on the bank capital proposals from the
Fed’s Michael Barr. Most of them were approving, but there were some interesting points of
dissent. Several readers took the line that our friend Matt Klein (everyone subscribe to The
Overshoot!) laid out in an email:

A partial defence of Barr: I think of capital as a way to reduce the risk of
flight from uninsured depositors and other creditors, because runs are
usually predicated on concerns about the distribution of losses. Silicon Valley
Bank and First Republic would not have had those kinds of outflows if
depositors knew that someone else would be on the hook for underwater
bonds and loans . . .
Given the outflows they had, more capital would not have helped, but maybe
a different balance sheet structure would have prevented the runs in the first
place.

In other words, more capital would not have helped once the run began, but a thin capital layer
made the run more likely. This is a plausible view, though I think it’s probably wrong (the Barr
point I called “almost total nonsense” was the idea that different capital treatment of “available for
sale” securities would have helped prevent the SVB and First Republic failures). If you read back
through Unhedged’s coverage of SVB and First Republic, you might find some support for this
view, in fact. We noted several times that one way to screen for weak banks is to see what capital
levels would be if securities portfolios were marked to market. Here is a table from our newsletter
of March 14:

The third column, the leverage ratio, is a measure of capital strength (tier one equity
capital/assets). The far-right column is the leverage ratio if capital were reduced to reflect
unrealised securities losses. Back then, terms like “mark to market insolvent” were thrown around
a lot, and in the case of SVB, that term was accurate. And it seems pretty safe to assume this kind of
talk helped precipitate the run that overwhelmed the bank.
So you might say, with Barr, that a few more percentage points of capital might have decreased the
chance of a run. Of course, First Republic was not mark-to-market insolvent — not even nearly —
and it got crushed by a depositor run, too; but things are different for the second bank to fall than
for the first. So there seems to be an argument here in favour of Barr’s view, which urges that
higher capital levels increase “resilience”, by which he means the ability to survive losses whatever
their source.

I don’t buy this. The ultimate source of the SVB failure was catastrophically bad rate risk
management combined with a flighty, concentrated, uninsured investor base. If we think that the
SVB mess proves we need better regulation and supervision, the target ought to be the ultimate
cause of the problem. Maybe we ought to change the way we risk weight long-term governmentbacked securities. Maybe we ought to have asset-liability matching rules, or require more capital
just for banks with lots of uninsured deposits. Or whatever.
But to argue that all banks need more capital at all times because a tiny handful of them forgot
fundamental principles of risk management seems looney to me. Because higher capital
requirements have a cost. Higher capital requirements are nothing but a requirement that banks
lend less, and especially when the economy is soft, we don’t want less bank lending, we want more
of it. I hate to sound like a bank lobbyist, but there it is.
There may be good arguments that show that all banks need more capital. The SVB mess is not one
of them.

One good read
The Economist rubbishes the concept of “greedflation”, which needed it (good week for them; they
also had a nice piece on the Minivan Taliban).

FT Unhedged podcast
Can’t get enough of Unhedged? Listen to our
new podcast, hosted by Ethan Wu and Katie
Martin, for a 15-minute dive into the latest
markets news and financial headlines, twice a
week. Catch up on past editions of the
newsletter here.

Recommended newsletters for you
Swamp Notes — Expert insight on the intersection of money and power in US politics. Sign up
here
The Lex Newsletter — Lex is the FT’s incisive daily column on investment. Sign up for our
newsletter on local and global trends from expert writers in four great financial centres. Sign up
here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US inflation
US interest rates
Markets
Federal Reserve
Michael Barr

