FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion US inflation

It’s far too early to declare the end of inflation
Economists on either side of the Atlantic should not bet on a ‘soft landing’

CHRIS GILES

© James Ferguson

Chris Giles
Published AUG 22 2023

Good news has strange effects. After just two months of encouraging US price developments, there
is much talk about the death of inflation and the lessons to be learnt.
Financial markets are betting on a soft landing of lower inflation without recession. Economists
speak of “immaculate disinflation”. Some go further, projecting US success in beating inflation will
apply everywhere. There are even mutterings that inflation was, after all, transitory and that the
seemingly painless decline in US CPI inflation should force a fundamental rethink of economic
theory. It has been hot in many parts of the world, but people are getting a little overexcited.

One Must-Read
This article was featured in the One
Must-Read newsletter, where we
recommend one remarkable story
each weekday. Sign up for the
newsletter here

Some facts are needed to frame the debate. Falling
US CPI inflation from a peak of over 9 per cent to 3.2
per cent in July this year cannot mask the huge
overshoot of prices compared with targets. Over the
past two years, this headline measure of US inflation
has risen 12 per cent — an annual rate roughly three
times faster than the 2 per cent the Federal Reserve
desires. In the eurozone and the UK the increases

over the past two years have been even higher, at 14.6 per cent and 17.6 per cent respectively. At a
minimum we have had almost six years of expected inflation in just a couple. Prices are rising
slower, but they are not falling back.
Everyone expected much of the rise in prices after the dislocations of the pandemic and Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine to be temporary. The worry was always that inflation would not fall all the way
to the 2 per cent targets on its own and could become quite sticky on the way down. That is exactly
what is happening and still the concern. Even after the latest good data, the Fed’s inflation
forecasts for the end of this year, next year and the one after are unlikely to improve much. All the
main errors have been in underestimating inflation’s strength and persistence rather than
overestimating it.

The Fed has become more pessimistic about hitting its inflation forecasts
over the past year
Forecast date

Jun-22

Sep-22

Dec-22

Mar-23

Headline PCE inflation

Jun-23

Core PCE inflation

Fed target

Q4 2023

Fed target

Q4 2024
Q4 2025
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

Source: Federal Reserv

Despite the sharp fall in the headline rate, the US economy still appears to be running hot and the
labour market has not yet come back into balance. As members of the Federal Open Market
Committee acutely observed at their latest meeting, “nominal wages were still rising at rates above
levels assessed to be consistent with the sustained achievement of the committee’s 2 per cent
inflation objective”.
If the US has seen some encouraging trends without sufficient progress, Europe has not yet
followed. The European Central Bank had to raise its forecasts of inflation in its latest predictions
and measures of core inflation have become sticky. And while it is possible for UK statisticians to
construct measures showing underlying inflation beginning to fall, most data points still indicate a
post-Brexit entrenched wage price spiral. Definitions of price stability do not include services
inflation still running at 7.4 per cent in July, with annual wage growth over 8 per cent. This is not
the environment in which it makes sense for European central banks to declare victory over
inflation.

The central banks have, of course, become active inflation fighters over the past 18 months. A 5.25
percentage point rise in borrowing costs in the US, 5.15 percentage points in the UK and 4.25
percentage points in the eurozone are cooling labour markets, with vacancies falling and
unemployment rising in some countries. Much of their effects is still to be felt.
The facts do not suggest there need to be many more interest rate increases to defeat inflation. But
with underlying inflation still too high on both sides of the Atlantic, there is almost no coherent
case to be made that the vast majority of this monetary tightening was ill-conceived. We cannot
know how the major Atlantic economies would have fared had central bankers done nothing, but
there is little doubt that excess demand would be stronger, inflation higher and the problem of
persistent price rises would be worse.

The steps they took to contain inflation were therefore almost certainly necessary and there is little
case yet to shout mission accomplished. But one aspect of the fight against inflation has surprised
almost everyone — its lack of pain. Unemployment in the US is touching record lows and has
barely risen in Europe. The jobs market has defied expectations in a good way as interest rates have
risen.
Tempting as it might be to say that disinflation can therefore always be painless and we need to
rewrite the economics textbooks, this appears to be a case of special post-pandemic circumstances
rather than a theory-defying episode.

During and after the pandemic, the world suffered many supply-side shocks that contributed to the
initial rise in prices. These occurred globally in gummed up and less efficient supply chains, in
catastrophic rises in wholesale gas prices in Europe last year and in declines in US and UK labour
force participation.

Many of these have been fixed or ameliorated, helping to bring down inflation with less pain than
normal. This is far from bad news for economics because theories of price are always determined
by both supply and demand. Supply has improved, demand has been held in check with tighter
monetary policy. It is far too early to be mulling the future of macroeconomic theory. The question
now for the US and elsewhere is whether interest rates are roughly right or need to be edged a little
higher.
chris.giles@ft.com

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Chris Giles
Eurozone inflation
Global Economy
UK inflation
US inflation

