FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Global inflation

Inflation is a political challenge as well as an economic one
People care about price rises and the damage that they can do to real incomes

MARTIN WOLF

© James Ferguson

Martin Wolf
Published JUL 12 2022

The return of inflation is not just an important economic event. It is also a political one. As it
becomes decreasingly plausible that it will simply fade painlessly away, tough decisions must be
made on how to react to it.
This raises big issues. How did we get here? How large and durable a slowdown will be needed to
bring inflation back under control? Is policy tight enough already? If not, what further steps might
need to be taken? Not least, should inflation be brought down to previous targets or should
policymakers give up and raise their targets instead?

The latest Annual Report of the Bank for International Settlements provides an excellent analysis
of what is happening. More important, it illuminates the dangers in shifting away from the regime
of low inflation of the past 40 years.
By April 2022, notes the BIS, “three quarters of economies were experiencing inflation above 5 per
cent. Inflation was back, not as a long-sought friend, but as a threatening foe.” Indeed, inflation is
by now both high and widely spread across countries and sectors. This was at first unexpected and
then dismissed as transitory. Neither view has worn well. Inflation is also economically and
politically salient. Quite simply, people care about it. Not least, unexpected inflation also means
unexpected cuts in real incomes. Unsurprisingly, this is highly unpopular.

Inflation has become increasingly broad-based
Share (%) of CPI basket items with annual inflation over 5%. Median for advanced and emerging
economies*
EM median

Advanced median

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

Source: BIS • * shaded areas are 25th to 75th percentile range

The danger now is that of stagflation, defined as a prolonged episode of weak growth plus variable
and persistent inflation. To help us understand the nature of this challenge better, the BIS explains
the differences between a regime of low inflation and one of high inflation. It does so by looking
“under the hood” at how inflation regimes actually work. Crucially, it turns out, inflation behaves
differently in these two regimes.

When inflation is durably low, for example, its volatility also falls, as does its persistence: it is selfequilibrating. This is partly because people expect it to stabilise and also because most of the time
they just ignore it. The low volatility of inflation is not because of low volatility of individual prices,
but of low correlation across them. Relative price changes, even big ones, then have little impact on
the general price level.

A regime of high inflation is the opposite. Big shifts in relative prices — large currency
depreciation, for example — spread swiftly across the economy, as people struggle to protect
themselves against the shocks to real incomes. The mechanism behind this spread is price-price
and wage-price spirals. Moreover, the greater the worry, the more pre-emptive efforts become.
Expectations are crucial. When people cease to know what to expect, they become even more
urgently defensive.

Explaining away what is happening as due to “exogenous” supply shocks is a big error. What is
exogenous to any one economy is often endogenous to all of them. Thus, rapidly expanding
demand in a number of significant economies will create a surge in global demand. Third, excess
demand will always show up first where prices are flexible, notably in commodities, before
spreading.

Crucially, we are now on the cusp of a shift from a low to a high inflation regime. Why has this peril
arrived? One explanation was overconfidence in the permanence of low inflation. Another was
backward-looking targets of average inflation and overconfidence in the ability to provide forward
guidance. Another was ignoring money when, yet again, it mattered. Yet another was
overconfidence in supply capacity. Of course, there were also shocks, such as the war.
The more entrenched such a shift in regimes becomes, the greater the costs of reversing it. At
worst, it might take a sharp recession or a prolonged slowdown. So far, policymakers have not
made this clear. This is also why they are rather likely to give in before they have achieved their
goal. It is also why a prolonged stagflation is now quite likely.

An important question then is whether policymakers have done enough to bring inflation down to
their targets. The main argument that they have is that financial conditions have tightened sharply
already. That is closely related to the rise in financial fragility since the stagflationary episode of the
1970s. At the same time, ratios of broad money to nominal gross domestic product are still at
unprecedented levels, while real policy rates remain negative. It is quite possible that policy will
have to tighten a great deal further in the months ahead.
Confronted with the need for deeper slowdowns or tighter policy, central banks might flinch.
Politicians certainly will. A possible outcome is a stagflationary cycle, as central banks oscillate
between doing too little, reversing, then doing too little again. Another is that many policymakers
agree that 2 per cent inflation is too strict. Why not go for 4 per cent or more instead? This would
have the benefit of giving central banks more room for downward manoeuvre in interest rates in
future, so reducing the need for quantitative easing in subsequent downturns.

Real policy rates have remained exceptionally low
Per cent (from 1990 for the advanced economies; from 2000 for the emerging economies)
95th percentile

75th percentile

10

Median

25th percentile

5th percentile

Advanced
economies

Latest

Emerging market
economies

5

0

-5

er
gi
ng
Ot
he
re
m

As
ia

La
tA
m

Ot
he
ra
dv
an
ce
d

Ja
pa
n

Eu
ro
zo
ne

US

-10

Source: B

The argument is appealing, not least politically, but there are strong objections. Giving up when the
going gets tough tells people that policymakers will always give up whenever it gets tough.
Furthermore, there is the alternative of using negative policy rates instead. Above all, at, say, 4 per
cent inflation will be all too evident all the time. In such an inflation-sensitive environment, people
will not only find it far harder to separate relative from general price changes, but will just be
waiting for the policymakers to deceive them once again.
Money is an essential public good. Sound money underpins political and economic stability: it
must not be thrown away.
martin.wolf@ft.com
Follow Martin Wolf with myFT and on Twitter

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Martin Wolf
Global inflation
UK inflation
US inflation

