FT PROFESSIONAL

Markets Briefing Markets

US stocks dip and bond yields rise after stronger-than-forecast inflation data
Oil prices rally for sixth straight week as global demand rises and supply cuts persist

Data this week showed overall price pressures in the US have eased over the past year following an aggressive central bank
tightening campaign © Financial Times

Kate Duguid and Harriet Clarfelt in New York, Myles McCormick in Houston and Daria Mosolova in London
Published AUG 11 2023 | Updated AUG 11 2023, 16:38

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
US stocks slipped on Friday after producer price inflation data came in above market expectations,
heightening investors’ concerns that the world’s largest economy could keep rates higher for
longer.
Wall Street’s benchmark S&P 500 closed 0.1 per cent lower while the tech-focused Nasdaq
Composite fell 0.7 per cent.

Friday marked the second consecutive week of losses for both indices. It was the first time the
Nasdaq has had back-to-back weekly declines since December, and the first time for the S&P 500
since May. The biggest weekly drop in 11 months for chipmaker Nvidia, which is one of the topweighted stocks in the S&P 500 and Nasdaq, did little to help the indices’ fortunes. Nvidia shares
fell 9.5 per cent over the five trading days.
The broader market’s moves came after data in the US showed that annual producer inflation
accelerated to 0.8 per cent in July from 0.2 per cent in the previous month. The reading was
marginally above the 0.7 per cent forecast of economists polled by Reuters.
The dollar gained 0.3 per cent against a basket of six peer currencies following the data release,
hitting its highest level in more than a month.
“The increase in wholesale prices serves as a reminder that the data-dependent Fed isn’t ready to
declare victory on its campaign to quell inflation,” said Quincy Krosby, chief global strategist for
LPL Financial, a US broker-dealer.
A day earlier, the latest US consumer price inflation report showed that prices rose at a slowerthan-expected annual rate of 3.2 per cent in July, up from 3 per cent in the previous month.
Despite the uptick in the consumer price data, overall price pressures in the US have eased over the
past year following an aggressive tightening campaign by the Federal Reserve, which took interest
rates to their highest level in 22 years.

The overwhelming majority of investors expect the central bank to keep its benchmark federal
funds rate steady at its next meeting in September, yet the policy decision could be swayed by
upcoming economic data releases.
The yield on the policy-sensitive two-year US Treasury rose 0.07 percentage points to 4.89 per
cent, while yields on the benchmark 10-year note added 0.09 percentage points to 4.17 per cent.
Bond yields rise when prices fall.
Oil prices continued to shift north — rising for a sixth consecutive week — as global demand
smashes records just as supply cuts by Saudi Arabia remove barrels from the market.
The International Energy Agency said on Friday that worldwide consumption hit a record high of
103mn barrels a day in July — driven by strong summer air travel and surging Chinese demand.
The thirst for oil is straining an already tight market. Saudi Arabia said last week it would extend a
1mn barrel a day output cut designed to drive up prices into September.

Brent crude, the international benchmark, traded near a seven-month high of $87 a barrel and has
risen about 10 per cent over the past month. Some analysts have predicted that prices will breach
$100 a barrel before the year is out.
“There’s a sense . . . that the market is going to continue to tighten in the next few months,” said
Daniel Yergin, vice-chair at S&P Global. “Oil above 80 means there will certainly be a lot more
political focus on it in the US and around the world.”
Prices at the pump have also escalated, with petrol sitting at a nine-month high in the US of $3.84
a gallon, creating a political headache for president Joe Biden as his re-election campaign cranks
into gear.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Currencies
Bonds
Commodities
Equities
Markets

