FT PROFESSIONAL

Market Questions Markets

Did the Fed’s preferred inflation gauge ease last month?
Market Questions is the FT’s guide to the week ahead

© FT montage/Bloomberg/AFP via Getty

Alexandra White, Martin Arnold and Ian Johnston
Published AUG 21 2022

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel

Did the Fed’s preferred measure of inflation ease off in July?
The US Federal Reserve’s preferred measure of inflation, the core personal consumption
expenditures (PCE) price index, is expected to have cooled in July, following last month’s lowerthan-expected consumer price index figures and an unexpected decline in producer prices.

Consumer price growth and producer prices eased in July largely because of lower petrol prices,
and Friday’s PCE report is likely to follow that inflation trend.
The core PCE index — which strips out volatile food and energy prices — is forecast to have
increased 0.3 per cent from a monthly gain of 0.6 per cent in June, according to economists polled
by Reuters.
“Weakness in prices of medical services, airfares, and financial services in July’s PPI notably
lowered the translation of July PCE prices from what we had pencilled in after the July CPI,” said
UBS analysts in a note. They forecast core PCE inflation to fall to 4.5 or 4.6 per cent from an
annualised rate of 4.8 per cent in June.
PCE rose more than expected to an annualised high of 6.8 per cent in June, dashing hopes that
headline inflation peaked at 6.6 per cent in March. High petrol prices likely contributed to the
worse than expected headline figure, but the core figure jumped to 4.8 per cent in June from the
previous year, up from 4.7 per cent in May.
The headline PCE reading has been susceptible to substantial moves this year, given the volatility
of the energy and food sectors that has been exacerbated by the war in Ukraine.
Fed governor Christopher Waller said in a speech on July 14 that he expects monetary policy to be
restrictive until there has been a “sustained reduction” in the core figure.
The Fed raised its benchmark interest rate by 0.75 percentage points for the second consecutive
month in July to tackle inflation. Minutes from the July meeting show Fed officials are planning
for more rate increases at future meetings. Alexandra White

Did eurozone business activity decline further last month?
The gloom surrounding the eurozone economy is likely to deepen on Tuesday, when a benchmark
survey of businesses is expected to reveal a further decline in orders, output and confidence.
While tourism and hospitality related services have been boosted this summer by the lifting of
most coronavirus restrictions, the benefits of this are expected to be cancelled out by a rising
number of countervailing factors.

Russia is squeezing natural gas supplies to Europe, Italy is in the grip of political turmoil and
record inflation is eroding household spending and business investment, convincing many
economists that the eurozone is heading for recession.
Jessica Hinds, senior Europe economist at Capital Economics, said in a note to clients last week
that the economic benefits from easing pandemic restrictions “appear to be fading already and the
headwinds to growth are building”.
S&P Global’s flash eurozone composite purchasing managers’ index is expected to confirm this
downbeat outlook on Tuesday, when its reading for the eurozone is forecast to drop from 49.9 in
July to 49.5 in August.
This would be the second consecutive month that the index has dropped below the crucial 50 mark
that separates growth from contraction — something that until July had not happened in the
eurozone since early last year.
“We have had a recession in our central forecasts for a while; this is to say a technical one in the
third and fourth quarters,” said Claus Vistesen, chief eurozone economist at Pantheon
Macroeconomics, who expects a steeper fall in the eurozone PMI reading to 48. “We think the
eurozone economy is now in recession. Germany, at the very least, is.” Martin Arnold

Why haven’t expectations of higher interest rates boosted the
pound?
Inflation in the UK reached a 40-year high of 10.1 per cent in July and the rapid pace of price
growth has prompted expectations of more aggressive interest rate rises from the Bank of
England.
Higher interest rates tend to boost a country’s currency, as they support foreign investment and
demand for a currency relative to those from countries with lower rates.
But since the latest UK consumer price index data release on Wednesday, sterling has slipped
roughly 1 per cent against the dollar.

The pound is down more than 10 per cent against the dollar this year and just under 1 per cent
against the euro, despite the European Central Bank only raising rates out of negative territory in
July.
Some analysts say the pound’s poor performance can be attributed to the UK’s gloomy economic
outlook. The BoE forecasts the UK will soon enter five quarters of recession. A decline in gross
domestic product would, theoretically, lower the appeal of the pound relative to other currencies.
“The currency is dribbling lower because the market sees a negative growth impact [from higher
rates],” said James Athey, investment director at Abrdn. “Sterling is latching on to the growth
outlook rather than the rate outlook.”
The July CPI data sparked a sell-off in short-dated UK gilts, which are sensitive to interest rate
expectations, as the yield on the debt instruments reached heights last seen in 2008. Bond yields
rise as their prices fall.
The pound’s weakness has raised questions about the UK’s longer-term economic health.
“Rising rates and a falling currency are more often seen in emerging markets than in developed
markets and it possibly [suggests] markets [are] questioning the credibility of UK policy in the
longer term,” said Adam Cole, chief currency strategist at RBC Capital Markets.
The likelihood of more fiscal spending to battle the cost of living crisis, increasing the UK’s
borrowing, is likely to drag further on the pound, Cole added. Ian Johnston
Are we heading towards a global recession? Our economics editor Chris Giles and US economics
editor Colby Smith discussed this and how different countries are likely to react in our latest IG
Live. Watch it here.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Currencies
Eurozone economy
Sovereign bonds
US economy
UK economy

