FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Markets Insight

Inflation, inflation, inflation — the main risk ahead for investors
Diversification to cushion impact of rising prices is needed

KAREN WARD

Inflation can truly spoil the fun © Bloomberg

Karen Ward
Published DEC 8 2025

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
The writer is chief market strategist for Europe, Middle East and Africa at JPMorgan Asset
Management

After another strong year and with stocks sitting on fairly lofty valuations, some investors are
starting to worry about what 2026 might have in store. While Wall Street strategists may be
expecting double-digit gains for US stocks in 2026, more bearish forecasters flag concerns about
various risks from the bursting of an AI bubble to problems in private credit to a new round of
geopolitical tensions.
But the main thing investors have to worry about in 2026 is inflation. To understand why, we need
to reflect on 2025. This year has already brought all manner of bad headlines, from tariff wars to
conflicts. And yet here we are, with most major equity indices close to all-time highs and corporate
bond yields at near-record tight spreads over government debt, indicating confidence in the
outlook for companies.
The reason markets have remained so buoyant is because it’s increasingly clear that governments
will spend their way out of all political predicaments. Having generated geopolitical tensions with
his tariffs, President Donald Trump quickly turned his attention to tax cuts, which will shortly
benefit US households as they claim rebates early in the new year. This should put paid to any talk
of US slowdown, since the one rule of thumb economic forecasters can rely on is that when
American consumers receive money, they almost immediately spend it. And if these rebates don’t
lift Trump’s popularity, expect new stimulus ahead of the midterm elections next November.
Even Germany has joined the fiscal party, embarking on a plan to spend €500bn, equivalent to 12
per cent of its GDP. Countries in the south of Europe also are benefiting from the money handed
out by the EU’s Recovery Fund, originally created following the Covid pandemic. France and the
UK don’t have the fiscal space to embark on new stimulus programmes, but both are struggling to
rein in spending or raise major taxes because the politics are simply too difficult.
Alongside the heady cocktail of government stimulus, markets are also enjoying monetary easing.
The US Federal Reserve is under tremendous pressure to be a “national champion” and bring
interest rates down. Markets have rightly factored in an asymmetry in Fed policy: there are very
few circumstances in which the Fed will raise rates in 2026, but it will be quick and aggressive to
cut rates should any downside risks in the economy materialise.

This behaviour at the Fed will force other central banks to follow suit. Any country in which the
central bank keeps interest rates high to counter the risk of rising inflation will become a haven for
depositors looking for high interest rates and a commitment to preserving the value of a currency.
Deposit inflows may sound good, but in fact they are likely to be accompanied by a punishing
appreciation of the currency, leading to problems for export-oriented manufacturers. Thus, the
Fed’s bias to cut creates a global bias to cut.
This central bank option could be exercised quickly if geopolitical tensions, or a wobble in tech
euphoria, send stocks lower. The upside for investors is that as interest rates fall, bond prices will
rise. This would benefit the multi-asset investors that have sought asset-class diversification as a
cushion. Plus there is the likelihood that falling interest rates would at some point encourage
investors back into riskier markets like equities.
Inflation, however, can truly spoil the fun. Neither governments nor central banks can respond to
inflation with more stimulus, not least because the bond market will not allow them to. If global
bond investors suspect inflation will erode the value of their holdings, they will demand higher
interest rates, stunting the ability of governments to borrow or central banks’ ability to ease policy.
Investors should bear in mind this inflation risk when structuring a portfolio for 2026. In most
scenarios, policy excess should lead to a good backdrop for riskier assets such as stocks. However,
protection is needed against inflation risk. The year 2022 taught us that there aren’t many places to
hide in public markets when inflation rears its head, as both stocks and bonds fall. The best options
are found in private markets, such as transportation assets like aircraft and ships, core
infrastructure and timber.
Vehicles that offer exposure to such assets for retail investors are illiquid, but this may be a price
worth paying for diversification against inflation risk. Investors could then truly enjoy the party
induced by policy excess without fear of the hangover.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Karen Ward
Markets Insight
Investments
Global inflation
US economy

