FT PROFESSIONAL

US Treasury bonds

Treasury yields climb after stubborn US inflation data
Gold touches fresh record high while oil prices rise

Yields on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note rose 0.13 percentage points to 4.32% © Reuters

George Steer in New York
Published APR 1 2024 | Updated APR 1 2024, 17:22

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
Yields on US government debt rose to their highest levels in two weeks on Monday as stubborn
inflation and a jump in manufacturing activity tempered expectations for interest rate cuts in 2024.
Benchmark 10-year Treasury note yields rose 0.13 percentage points to 4.32 per cent, while those
on two-year Treasuries, which are sensitive to interest rate policy, rose 0.09 percentage points to
4.71 per cent.

At current levels, the jump in yields — which move inversely to price — would respectively rank as
2024’s third- and fifth-largest increases for the two-year and 10-year bonds, according to LSEG
data.
The moves came after data released on Friday showed year-on-year US inflation hit 2.5 per cent in
February, according to the headline personal consumption expenditure metric tracked closely by
policymakers at the Federal Reserve, up slightly from January’s figure. Data released earlier on
Monday showed a jump in the ISM manufacturing index in March.
Traders reacted by slightly scaling back expectations for US rates coming down. Markets are now
pricing in two or three quarter-point cuts by the end of the year, down from five or six at the start
of 2024.
Monday’s Treasury market moves were likely to have been caused by “a combination of the
stronger PCE spending print on Friday and strong ISM”, said Gennadiy Goldberg, head of US rates
strategy at TD Securities.
“Trading is also relatively thin today” because of the Easter holiday in London, “so that may explain
some of [the moves]”, he added.

Stephen Brown, Capital Economics’ deputy chief North America economist, wrote that ISM data
showing a rise in the prices-paid index to a 20-month high “looks somewhat concerning for the
Federal Reserve” but “appears to largely reflect higher oil prices rather than a renewed rise in core
goods inflation pressures”.
After notching their strongest first quarter in five years, US stock prices on Monday followed
Treasuries lower in early-afternoon trading in New York.
The benchmark S&P 500 index was down 0.2 per cent, with 290 stocks lower on the day. The techheavy Nasdaq Composite stood 0.1 per cent higher. European equity markets were closed.
Asian stocks began the quarter on the front foot. China’s CSI 300 and Hong Kong’s Hang Seng
indices added 1.6 per cent and 0.9 per cent, respectively, after a rebound in China’s manufacturing
activity added to hopes of improving economic growth.
In commodity markets, gold hit a fresh record high on the first day of the second quarter,
extending a multi-month rally.

The metal was trading at $2,239.3 a troy ounce in New York on Monday, according to LSEG data,
after hitting an intraday high of $2,265.49 earlier.
Brent crude, the international oil benchmark, rose 0.8 per cent to $87.73 a barrel.
Additional reporting by Kate Duguid in New York

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US Treasury bonds
US economy
US equities
George Steer

