FT PROFESSIONAL

Unhedged Markets

Are higher rates inflationary?
And the death of the stock size factor

© FT montage/

Robert Armstrong and Ethan Wu
Published APR 18 2024

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
This article is an onsite version of our Unhedged newsletter. Premium subscribers can sign up
here to get the newsletter delivered every weekday. Standard subscribers can upgrade to
Premium here, or explore all FT newsletters

Good morning. ASML, which manufactures tools for semiconductor production, reported a big
drop in bookings yesterday. Semiconductor stocks, including mighty Nvidia, fell sharply in
response, and the whole market was a bit morose. A blip, or the first chink in the armour of the
great AI narrative? You tell us: robert.armstrong@ft.com and ethan.wu@ft.com.

No, higher rates are not (very) inflationary
Here’s a theory that’s been making the rounds. Interest rates are high, and yet growth is strong and
may even be accelerating, while inflation is stubborn. So maybe high rates, far from holding growth
and inflation back, are stoking them.
The idea is not, on its face, totally crazy. A few economists, notably the modern monetary theorist
Stephanie Kelton, have long promoted some version of it. Policy interventions work through
multiple channels, so the different effects may point in different directions or vary over time.
Perhaps we’ve worked through most of the disinflationary impulse (sleepy M&A, lower ratesensitive activity, higher financing costs, etc) and are left with the inflationary residue.
Three plausible causal mechanisms have been proposed:

1 Through the frozen housing market. JPMorgan Asset Management’s
Jack Manley made this case to us yesterday. He argues that the recent bout
of stubborn shelter inflation is being caused by the lock-in effect.
Homeowners, holding cheap legacy mortgages, become unwilling to sell
their homes. That restricts housing supply and, combined with
unaffordable mortgage rates, increases demand in the rental market, thus
generating shelter inflation. Until the Fed unlocks housing supply with
lower mortgage rates, says Manley, inflation is likely to stay hot.

2 Through rising consumer interest income. All those high-yielding
cash accounts have got to mean something. The hedge funder David
Einhorn made an argument along these lines in Bloomberg earlier this year,
noting that the $13tn in households’ short-term interest-bearing assets
exceeds the $5tn in non-mortgage consumer debt. He put the net income
stream at $400bn per year.

3 Through rising corporate interest income. As with households,
corporate cash hoards now generate meaningful returns.
Let’s take these in order.
On the housing market, we’re willing to believe that high rates could be supporting rental inflation
(though more timely rental market measures look less bad than the official data). But we are not
convinced that cuts would lower rental inflation. Measures of housing sector demand — from
housing starts and construction employment to residential investment and mortgage applications
— have looked weak for nearly two years. Whatever boost to existing-home supply might happen
would be offset by a pop in demand. Just how those net out isn’t obvious, but given the structural
supply shortage in the housing market, our bet is it would be inflationary.
The consumer interest income story is intuitive but ultimately unrealistic. There is no doubt people
get paid more interest now (and, if they have fixed-rate mortgages, do not pay much more interest
than they did a few years ago). Since rates started rising, the increase in monthly personal interest
income is $265bn. That’s a lot! But remember, over the same period, interest expenses and
inflation were rising, too. The chart below uses data on non-mortgage consumer interest income
from the US Bureau of Economic Analysis. Real net interest income (ie, less interest expense), in
green, has fallen since the start of 2022:

There is also something slightly odd about concluding that, because one can earn 5 per cent in a
money-market account now, people feel richer. The question is: where was that money before? If it
was sitting by itself in a near-yieldless savings account, OK, maybe they do feel richer (though if it
hasn’t been moved into a money-market account, they do not feel much richer: average yields on
savings accounts have moved from .06 per cent in 2022 to a lordly .46 per cent today). But if the
money was part of a cash/bond/fixed-income allocation, returns on that allocation have been awful
in the past few years, because of the monstrous year 2022. Do I feel rich because a part of my
portfolio that has performed horribly for years now pays a high yield?

Lastly, business interest income. National accounts data suggests non-financial companies’ net
financing costs have fallen 40 per cent since rates began rising, which may suggest rising interest
income has been a big offset. Curiously, though, this trend is less clear among S&P 500 companies,
which we would expect to have larger cash reserves and more debt fixed at low rates, giving them
more to gain from higher rates. But over the past 10 quarters, net interest expense (that is, interest
expense less investment income) among S&P companies has been steady and the recent trend is, if
anything, up.

This is a question we’ve admittedly only spent a little time considering (readers, weigh in). It’s
possible, though far from clear, that higher rates could be having a mildly inflationary effect. But
it’s just one factor among many. Growth appears strong for fundamental reasons: a tight labour
market, productivity gains, healthy consumer balance sheets outside of the low end. The highrates-stoking-inflation hypothesis is neither established enough nor big enough in magnitude to
sway us or, in any likelihood, the Fed.

The size factor RIP?
Over at Alphaville, Robin Wigglesworth has written an excellent and thorough piece about how US
small cap stocks, depending on how you measure them, have not outperformed US big caps. Those
of you who managed to stay awake back in finance school will recall the theoretical consensus was
once that small should outperform big over time, either because smaller is riskier and investors
need to be paid for that, or because of some ingrained behavioural something or other among
investors, or both. This is the “size factor”.
Here’s the incriminating chart:

What happened? It’s not clear, but Wigg has three main ideas:

1 The quality of small cap companies has declined, with lower growth, weaker
profits and more fragile balance sheets. Many strong smaller companies
have been taken private. And lately, the weaker balance sheets have been
exposed by rising rates.

2 Greater transparency and liquidity means there are less undiscovered gems
in small cap indices.

3 The Russell 2000 index’s weighting scheme creates frictions that weigh on
performance.
All three may be true to a greater or lesser extent. Unhedged has only two small points to add.
Factor performance moves in long regimes, as investors in the quality factor have discovered, to
their sorrow, over the past 20 years or so. In particular, as factor-investment magnate Cliff Asness
of AQR wrote a few years ago, factors can undergo changes in valuation that cause them to over- or
underperform for significant periods. These changes can overwhelm fundamental factor
performance for a long time. But valuation shifts don’t go on forever. Looking at a 20-year chart of
the price/earnings valuations of the S&P 500 and its small cap sibling the S&P 600, it seems
possible that this is what has happened to small stocks:

Small caps (dark blue line) once traded at a sustained premium. They lost it five years ago or so,
and they now trade at a big discount to both big caps (light blue) and their own long-term average
(pink line). Meanwhile, big caps trade way above their own long-term average (green). That goes a
long way to explaining Robin’s long-term price return chart. Does the valuation shift have to
reverse? Nope. Can the small cap discount keep widening forever? Probably not.
(I should note that Asness does not believe in a size factor per se. He thinks that small stocks have
a higher beta — volatility relative to the market — and this, rather than anything about their size,
explains why small cap investors get paid more. There is no volatility-adjusted size factor, in other
words. But if you do believe that there is a size factor, the above point about valuation shifts still
applies).

The second point is closely related. If we grant the idea that small cap companies have become
fundamentally weaker recently, that still does not mean they will now underperform big caps
forever, or that there never was a size factor. What it does mean is that their valuations have to
adjust to the new fundamental reality. That could be what is happening in the p/e chart above.
That would not necessarily signal the death of the size factor.

One good read
Sport gambling is proliferating in the US. So expect to see more of this.

FT Unhedged podcast
Can’t get enough of Unhedged? Listen to our
new podcast, hosted by Ethan Wu and Katie
Martin, for a 15-minute dive into the latest
markets news and financial headlines, twice a
week. Catch up on past editions of the
newsletter here.

Recommended newsletters for you
Swamp Notes — Expert insight on the intersection of money and power in US politics. Sign up
here
Due Diligence — Top stories from the world of corporate finance. Sign up here

Letter in response to this article:
US inflation rate shows healthy signs of a growing economy / From Bill Smyth, Bagshot, Surrey,
UK

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US inflation
Equities
Markets
S&P 500
Federal Reserve

