FT PROFESSIONAL

Federal Reserve

Fed official supports 0.75 percentage point rate rise in July
Christopher Waller expects inflation data to warrant a back to back jumbo increase

Waller does not expect inflation to moderate sufficiently in the coming weeks to slow the pace of monetary tightening. © Getty
Images

Colby Smith in Washington
Published JUN 18 2022

A top US Federal Reserve official expressed early support for another 0.75 percentage point
interest rate rise at the central bank’s next meeting in July, in anticipation that inflation will not
moderate sufficiently to slow the pace of monetary tightening.
In a remarks delivered on Saturday, Christopher Waller, a Fed governor, affirmed the central
bank’s commitment to tackling the worst inflation problem in more than forty years, saying it was
“all in on re-establishing price stability”.

Waller’s comments come just days after the Fed significantly stepped up its efforts to tackle soaring
prices and implemented the first 0.75 percentage point rate rise since 1994. The Swiss National
Bank and Bank of England also raised interest rates this week, as the world’s central banks took
aggressive action to stamp out surging inflation.
“If the data comes in as I expect I will support a similar-sized move at our July meeting,” Waller
said on a panel hosted by the Fed’s Dallas branch, characterising this week’s decision as “another
significant step toward achieving our inflation objective”.
In addition to raising the federal funds rate to a new target range of 1.50 to 1.75 per cent, the US
central bank also signalled support for what looks set to be the fastest monetary tightening since
the 1980s.
Most officials now expect the policy rate to rise well above 3 per cent by the end of the year and
potentially notch as high as 3.8 per cent in 2023.
Reflecting that this rapid rise in borrowing costs is likely to cause some economic pain,
policymakers projected the unemployment rate rising over the next two years from its current 3.6
per cent level to 4.1 per cent in 2024, with core inflation still just above its 2 per cent target. Rate
cuts are also expected by then, as growth is projected to slow below 2 per cent.

Fed officials project drastically larger interest rate rises and sooner than
expected
Each dot represents one FOMC participant's projection for the midpoint of US interest rates (%) from
every meeting since June 2021. Boxplot lines indicate first quartile, median and third quartile values
for each annual projection.
Jun 2021

Sep 2021

Dec 2021

Mar 2022

Jun 2022

5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

2022

2023

2024

Longer run

Many economists believe that the economic fallout from the Fed’s actions to tame inflation —
which they anticipate could get worse in coming months and be more persistent than expected —
will be far greater than what the central bank has so far acknowledged. That means higher
unemployment and increased odds of a recession next year, they warned.

While Jay Powell, the chair, conceded this week that it is becoming “more challenging” to achieve a
so-called “soft landing”, he maintains there are still paths to cool the economy to the point where
inflation moderates but without causing undue economic harm.
The Fed has faced substantial criticism for contributing in part to this problem by moving too
slowly last year to tackle inflation and treating it instead as a “transitory” phenomenon that would
work itself out organically. By allowing price pressures to get out of hand, the Fed now must act
much more aggressively than otherwise would have been the case, its detractors say, putting the
economic recovery at risk.
Waller on Saturday addressed these judgments, admitting that some of the criteria the Fed had put
in place before it began scaling back its monetary stimulus were too “restrictive”. Instead of
reducing monetary accommodation “later and faster”, Waller said the Fed may have been able to
do so “sooner and gradually”.
The central bank is now poised to continue tightening the screws of its monetary policy in forceful
fashion, with Powell indicating it will maintain an aggressive pace until officials see “compelling
evidence” that inflation is moderating. That entails a series of decelerating monthly inflation
numbers.
For its next meeting in July, the chair said the Fed would probably choose between a 0.50 or 0.75
percentage point increase, but some economists believe an even bigger move of a full percentage
point is not completely off the table.
Neel Kashkari, the dovish president of the Minneapolis Fed, on Friday said he could support
another 0.75 percentage point move next month, but cautioned the central bank against doing “too
much more front-loading”.
He said a “prudent strategy” may be continuing with half-point rate rises after the July meeting
“until inflation is well on its way down to 2 per cent”.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global inflation
US economy
Central banks
Federal Reserve
Colby Smith

