FT PROFESSIONAL

US economy

Cooling US jobs market looms over
central bankers at Jackson Hole
The Federal Reserve has brought down inflation
but must now steer the economy away from
recession

SteelStacks in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania. The site is dedicated to arts, culture and family events © Alamy

Colby Smith in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania
Published AUG 21 2024

A short drive from the plant that once housed industrial titan Bethlehem Steel before its
bankruptcy in 2001, Lehigh Valley Plastics each week produces tens of thousands of parts needed
in machines across the US.
Operating out of a 57,000 sq ft warehouse, it manufactures sheaves for cranes, wear pads for truck
producers and gaskets used by the oil industry. Its clients also include medical equipment
producers and food companies.
Pennsylvania’s Lehigh Valley, a logistics and manufacturing hub just a day’s drive from a third of
US consumers, has become an emblem of America’s economy — a hive of economic activity that
has defied economists who feared a recession after more than a year of restrictive interest rates.

And the region will be among those on the Federal Reserve’s radar in the coming weeks when the
central bank weighs when to lower borrowing costs: a decision with implications for jobs in the
Lehigh Valley, global markets, and even how Americans feel about their economy when they pick a
new president in November.
The Lehigh Valley hive is now showing signs of cooling.
Lehigh Valley Plastics grew rapidly after the pandemic, rehiring workers and increasing overall
headcount to almost 90 people. To attract skilled machinists, it raised starting wages by 15 per
cent.

The president of Lehigh Valley Plastics says the company is ‘definitely seeing a [downwards] shift in demand’ © Lehigh Valley
Plastics

But after filling six more positions, the company’s president Shelly McWilliams is likely to pause
hiring.
“We are definitely seeing a shift in demand. It’s definitely going down,” she said, warning of a
“general slowdown through the end of the year” as customers had turned more “conservative” after
a period of “overbuying” in the aftermath of the pandemic.

Across the Lehigh river in Allentown, Russell Breuer, the founder and chief executive of pet food
company Spot & Tango, has noticed shifts among workers.
Business for the ecommerce site is booming as customers fork out $150 a month on average to feed
their dogs. But the number of job applicants had “doubled, if not tripled for certain roles”, he said.
More employees are also staying at the company.

Pennsylvania's jobs market mirrors America's
Hires, openings and quits (% of total employment) and tightness (openings per unemployed person)
in Pennsylvania since Jan 2019
Openings

Hires

Quits

Tightness

Pennsylvania
8

6

4

Neither McWilliams nor Breuer are yet contemplating lay-offs, but the outlook is murky.
“Hiring and finding people isn’t the priority it once was,” said Tony Iannelli, who leads the Greater
Lehigh Valley Chamber of Commerce. “Now it’s wondering about where the economy is headed.”

This caution will be at the forefront of policymakers’ minds when they gather from around the
world in Jackson Hole, Wyoming this week for the Kansas City Fed’s annual conference. Fed chair
Jay Powell will speak on Friday.

Downtown Allentown © Colby Smith/FT

Spot & Tango’s Allentown premises © Colby Smith/FT

Panic about rising prices has subsided, with the Fed’s 2 per cent inflation target now coming into
view. But financial markets and central bank officials are growing concerned about the health of
the world’s largest economy after more than a year of interest rates at 5.3 per cent, their highest
level since 2001.
The Fed is expected to begin cutting rates in September — but successfully cooling an overheated
economy without inducing a recession is rare. Economists are increasingly concerned about the
impact on jobs.
“However restrictive the Fed thought 5.3 per cent was in July of 2023, it is much, much more
restrictive now [that inflation has fallen], and the economy is certainly at risk of some shock,” said
Charles Evans, the former president of the Chicago Fed.

While the unemployment rate has risen to 4.3 per cent, it remains low by historical standards. So is
the number of Americans seeking weekly jobless benefits. Plus, consumers are still spending —
another sign of resilience that prompted Goldman Sachs to lower its recession odds to 20 per cent
last week.

At 3.6 per cent, the Lehigh Valley’s unemployment rate hardly signals an imminent recession
either.
Jobs growth across the region has been strongest in leisure, hospitality and construction, but is
tapering off across the trade and manufacturing sectors. There are marginally fewer job openings
than last year. But small businesses do not sense a cliff edge, even if they are more wary about the
future.
People continue to flock to see double features at Shankweiler’s Drive-In Theatre — the world’s
oldest — in Orefield, 20 minutes from Allentown. But co-owner Lauren McChesney is not sure
whether to hire more workers to replace her part-time staff when they leave after a blockbuster
summer.

The co-owner of Shankweiler’s Drive-In Theatre is unsure about whether to employ more workers when her part-time staff leave at
the end of the summer © Shankweilers Drive-in Theatre in Orefield, Pennsylvania

The Flying Egg diner in Bethlehem still boasts a busy weekend rush hour, but Ashlynn Miller, who
has worked there for three years, said it had shortened.

“Every single server, manager and cook that I know are all saying the same thing, which is that it
really seems like restaurants don’t seem as busy right now,” she said.
This kind of cooling off is the outcome the Fed sought as it began increasing interest rates in 2022.

Pennsylvania job markets by industry, pre- and post-pandemic
Employment and average weekly earnings by industry in Pennsylvania (rebased, Jan 2019 = 100)
Earnings

Employment

Total

Construction

Manufacturing

Trade

2020 2022 2024

2020 2022 2024

2020 2022 2024

2020 2022 202

100
50

Source: US Bureau of Labor Statistics • Not seasonally adjusted

Officials wanted higher borrowing costs to temper demand, taking the heat out of price rises
caused in part by pandemic-era supply snarls. As those bottlenecks have cleared, inflation has
fallen back below 3 per cent for the first time since March 2021, according to the latest consumer
price index report. It peaked at 9.1 per cent in mid-2022.
That this has occurred without a sharper rise in unemployment has taken economists by surprise.
History is dotted with few “soft landings”.

The job market has been loosening to pre-pandemic levels — including in
key election battlegrounds
Job openings per unemployed person since Jan 2019

US

Arizona

Michigan

Minnesota

3
2
1
0

3
2

But the pandemic changed the calculus around hiring for many companies, said Karianne Gelinas
of the Lehigh Valley Economic Development Corporation. Having been hobbled by severe worker
shortages as the economy reopened, businesses are cautious of lay-offs, opting instead to cut
vacancies.
That fear has motivated Liz Torres, operations manager at manufacturer Royal Industries, to keep
a small crew of workers on payroll year-round “even if we know it’s going to be slow”.
“We want to keep them for when the busy season is,” she added.

This has upended some traditional economic indicators. The recent rise in the unemployment rate
triggered the Sahm Rule, which marks the start of a recession when the three-month average rises
at least half a percentage point above its low over the past 12 months.
The economist who penned the rule has said this relationship may not hold this time around.

The Sahm Rule has been triggered
The Sahm indicator signals the start of a recession when the 3-month moving average of the
unemployment rate (%) rises by at least 0.5 ppts relative to the minimum of 3-month averages from
the previous year
Recessions are shaded

4

3

2

Why? For one, many economists attribute the uptick in unemployment to a swelling of the labour
pool due to increased immigration.

“That surge in immigration is something that may mean that our labour market indicators aren’t
following the typical patterns,” said Karen Dynan, a former senior Fed staffer now at Harvard
University. “I don’t see any signs that we should be panicking at this point, but of course you want
to be mindful about the uncertainty.”

The Fed is not panicking either, but economists will be closely watching how Powell talks about the
economic outlook during his speech on Friday.
Most market participants think the Fed will cut rates by a quarter-point in September, but a
minority think it could be a half-point, especially if the next jobs report is as weak as last month’s.
Borrowing costs are projected to fall almost a full percentage point this year.
San Francisco Fed president Mary Daly, a voting member on the Federal Open Market Committee,
pushed back on the need for aggressive cuts. “Gradualism is not weak, it’s not slow, it’s not behind,
it’s just prudent,” she told the Financial Times this week.
Officials have made clear they would take action in the event of an unexpected weakening of the
labour market — something FOMC voter Raphael Bostic of the Atlanta Fed endorsed.
John Roberts, a former Fed official, said Powell should “expand his optionality” on the pace of rate
cuts. A half-point reduction need not imply that the central bank thinks a recession is imminent —
but that it wants to prevent one.
For the first time in a while, Powell can be more upbeat now that inflation is under control, said
Torsten Slok, chief economist at Apollo Global Management.
“The incredible thing is that the Fed did this without crashing the economy. That does entitle them
to a victory lap.”
Additional reporting by Oliver Roeder in New York

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US economy
US inflation
US interest rates
US employment
Federal Reserve

