FT PROFESSIONAL

Market Questions Foreign exchange

Will US job numbers pave the way for Fed tapering?
Market Questions is the FT’s guide to the week ahead

US jobs will be in focus, the pound has tumbled against the dollar and the Australian housing market continues to run hot © Getty
Images; Bloomberg; Dreamstime

Colby Smith, Tommy Stubbington and Anthony Klan
Published OCT 3 2021

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel

Will US job numbers pave the way for Fed tapering?
The Federal Reserve is hurtling towards an announcement that it will soon scale back its massive
stimulus programme, and Friday’s jobs report could set the stage for such a move as early as
November.

The US central bank has said it would buy $120bn of Treasuries and agency mortgage-backed
securities each month until it saw “substantial further progress” on two goals: inflation averaging
around 2 per cent and maximum employment.
Surging consumer prices have long meant the first of these goals has been met, but many Fed
officials have signalled they wanted to see further gains in employment before moving ahead with
plans to begin reducing or “tapering” support.
Fed chair Jay Powell said at the most recent meeting on monetary policy that the jobs threshold
was “all but met”, and that he did not need to see a “knockout, great, super strong employment”
report for September “to feel like that test has been met”.
Economists surveyed by Bloomberg expect 488,000 new positions to be created for the month,
more than double the surprisingly weak job gains seen in August. Just 235,000 roles were added
then, sharply lower than the 1m or so jobs created in June and July and far short of the 733,000
positions expected by economists.
Analysts said the slowdown in jobs growth stemmed not only from surging Delta cases, which
hampered business activity, but worsening labour supply shortages.
Patrick Harker, president of the Philadelphia Fed, said at a recent event that the Fed’s purchases
“were necessary to keep markets functioning during the acute phase of the crisis. But to the extent
that we are still dealing with a labour force issue, the problem lies on the supply side, not with
demand.”
“You can’t go into a restaurant or drive down a commercial strip without noticing a sea of ‘Help
Wanted’ signs. Asset purchases aren’t doing much — or anything — to ameliorate that,” said
Harker. Colby Smith

Will the pound continue to weaken?
Sterling tumbled to its lowest level of the year last week against a resurgent dollar as investors
worried that the UK’s supply chain crisis could undermine the strength of the country’s economic
recovery.

The declines came despite a sharp rise in UK government bond yields after the Bank of England
surprised markets by saying it could raise interest rates as soon as later this year to tame high
inflation.
Sterling rebounded slightly from last week’s 2021 low against the US dollar of $1.341, ending the
weak at $1.3562.

But the decline in sterling has left it looking undervalued, according to Mark McCormick, head of
FX strategy at TD Securities, who is betting on its rebound against the euro.
“The market narrative liked the pound on a so-called hawkish BoE outlook, then hated it as
inflation runs out of control,” he said. “The truth probably lies somewhere in the middle.”
Some analysts think the pound’s recovery against the dollar may be trickier. The dollar hit its
highest level in more than a year against a basket of other currencies last week, boosted by the
prospect of the US Federal Reserve tightening its monetary policy and concerns about global
growth, which tend to drive investors towards the relative safety of the world’s reserve currency.

“I don’t think the dollar will retreat significantly until you get an improvement in risk appetite
globally,” said Jane Foley, head of FX strategy at Rabobank. “For that you need stronger growth
prospects, and at the moment the direction of travel is towards weaker data.” Tommy Stubbington

How will Australian policymakers respond to surging house
prices?
Australia’s central bank will almost certainly keep rates on hold when it meets on Tuesday, with
plunging iron ore prices and softer retail sales and jobs data offsetting the impact of a scorching
housing market.
“The consensus is no change on rates and nothing on quantitative easing,” said Shane Oliver, AMP
Capital chief economist.
At its meeting last month, the Reserve Bank of Australia announced it would cut bond purchases
from A$5bn a week to A$4bn but extend the programme until “at least mid-February 2022”, citing
“increased uncertainty” due to the outbreak of the Delta variant of Covid-19.
But a group of Australian regulators, including the RBA, said last Wednesday that house prices
were “still rising briskly in most markets”, with credit growth likely to remain strong.
The spectre of credit growth outstripping increases in household income would “add to the
medium-term risks facing the economy”, even though lending practices remained “sound”, said the
regulators.
Over the medium term, a Bank of America research report said Australian economic data was
expected to “deteriorate” to “reflect the lockdowns” but a “solid rebound is expected thereafter”.
The RBA has said it would not increase its interest rate until inflation was “sustainably” within a 2
per cent to 3 per cent target range, a condition it says was unlikely to be met before 2024.
Oliver said the mixed data coming out of the region underpinned that scenario. “The fall in the iron
ore price, the weakness in China and worries about Evergrande all support the Reserve Bank in
taking a dovish approach on interest rates,” he said. Anthony Klan

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Foreign exchange
Global Economy
US economy
Covid-19
Central banks

