FT PROFESSIONAL

High yield bonds

US junk bond market in powerful rebound on easing inflation worries
Amount of debt trading at distressed levels tumbles at unprecedented pace

Expectations that the Fed will bring in a third consecutive 0.75 percentage point interest rate rise in September have eased © Al
Drago/Bloomberg

Ian Johnston in London and Eric Platt in New York
Published AUG 16 2022

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
One of the riskiest corners of global financial markets has made an unprecedented recovery in the
past month, with prices of junk bonds rebounding as investors bet that the Federal Reserve’s
efforts to tame inflation will avoid triggering a deep recession.
The amount of US bonds trading at levels signalling severe investor concern has dropped rapidly
over the past five weeks, in a reflection of increased optimism from investors about the state of the
US economy.

Just 6.2 per cent of high-yield bonds are now trading at distressed levels, compared with 11.6 per
cent on July 5, according to analysis by Marty Fridson, chief investment officer of Lehmann Livian
Fridson Advisors.
Investors had backed away from US high-yield corporate debt earlier this year, fearing that
aggressive interest rate rises by the Fed would force the world’s largest economy into a protracted
slowdown, hitting the country’s weakest companies hardest.
But signs that the pace of price growth may be steadying — with inflation data last week coming in
lower than forecast — have contributed to a recovery in the price of those assets.
“Over a strikingly short interval, high-yield investors [have come] around to believing inflation is
sufficiently under control that the Fed [will] not have to hike interest rates dramatically enough to
trigger a deep recession,” said Fridson. “Time will tell whether they were correct in changing their
views on that matter.”

A lack of demand before the rebound in junk bond prices had pushed up the premium investors
received for holding high-yield bonds relative to government benchmarks, also known as the
spread. The amount of bonds trading with a spread of 10 percentage points or above, a sign that
they are distressed, more than doubled from January to May.
“Credit, like equities, is a simple animal,” said Michael Hartnett, chief investment strategist at
Bank of America Global Research. “As interest rates were going up and corporate earnings were
going down, the first six months of this year was an environment where spreads widened
dramatically.”
The rocky conditions prompted some companies to postpone planned borrowings, as central banks
withdrew their support for debt markets and inflation damped demand.
But several data releases have suggested that inflation has stabilised in the US economy, meaning
expectations that the Fed will bring in a third consecutive 0.75 percentage point rate rise in
September have eased.
A renewed sense of optimism about the economic outlook has sent traders back into debt markets.
Money has been pumped into investment grade, high yield and emerging market debt funds in
recent weeks, after sustained outflows since January, according to flows tracked by EPFR.

With banks delaying planned junk bond sales until after the summer holiday in the US, investors
keen to increase their holdings have instead had to gobble up existing debt. Yields on junk-rated
US corporate bonds have fallen from an average of 8.94 per cent at the end of June, to 7.45 per
cent on Friday.
That fall has been driven largely by a drop in the premium investors demand to lend to lower-rated
companies compared with the borrowing costs secured by the US government, rather than by a
broader decline in yields. The spread has tightened from 5.99 percentage points on July 5 to 4.25
percentage points on Friday.
Most striking is the pace of this “extraordinary” turnround, said Fridson. It has previously taken at
least four months for the spread on the Ice Data Services high yield index to move from 6
percentage points to the current level of 4. The recent drop has taken just over a month, Fridson’s
data show.

“Without a sense of inevitability of a near-term recession, investors are predisposed to take a
bullish view of any good news,” he said, although some traders remain reluctant.
Gabriele Foà, a portfolio manager at Algebris Investments, said conditions for the corporate bond
market were likely to improve further. “This is the tip of the iceberg of what credit can do . . . the
levels were crazy and priced for a very big storm. Now they’re not priced for a very big storm but
they’re still quite cheap.”
But Adam Abbas, the co-head of fixed income at Harris Associates, cautioned that when debt
issuance accelerates later this year, pressure could once again build on junk bonds just as investors
are confronted with weakening economic data.
“There needs to be a fair degree of scepticism built into credit analysis,” he said. “A dovish pivot
from [Fed chair Jay] Powell, one good employment report and [softer than expected rise in
consumer prices], those are certainly good. But the verdict is still out for us.”
Further inflation and jobs data will be published before the Fed’s rate decision next month. Signs
that inflation is creeping up again or a larger than expected interest rate rise could push more
bonds back into distressed territory.
The longer-term outlook means that analysts are wary of predicting a new bull market for credit.
“If you believe corporate earnings are going up and interest rates are going to come down —
winner, winner chicken dinner. If, like myself, you think it’s not going to be easy as that, the
expected returns don’t look as attractive,” said Hartnett.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
High yield bonds
US economy

Corporate bonds
Ian Johnston
Eric Platt

