FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion US inflation

The Fed must abandon average inflation targeting
Why should failures in the past drive monetary policy in the future?

WILLEM BUITER

When he announced the adoption of AIT last year, Fed chair Jay Powell emphasised the inflation expectations channel © Kevin
Dietsch/Getty

Willem Buiter
Published NOV 14 2021

The writer is a visiting professor at Columbia University
The most egregious mistake made by a leading central bank in the pursuit of price stability has
been the US Federal Reserve’s adoption of “average inflation targeting” in August 2020.

The 2 per cent annual inflation target for the personal consumption expenditure price index,
introduced in 2012, applied to the inflation rate in any given period and the anticipated inflation
rates for all future periods. AIT — even the flexible variety favoured by most members of the
Federal Open Market Committee — calls for a deliberate overshooting following episodes of belowtarget inflation, so as to ensure that average inflation rates are closer to the target.
A 2020 statement by the FOMC commits it to achieving “inflation that averages 2 per cent over
time”. But members of the Committee take different views of what that would mean in practice.
Atlanta Fed president Raphael Bostic considers targeting four- to eight-year moving averages of
assorted inflation metrics. His counterpart at the Cleveland Fed, Loretta Mester, mentions five-,
six- or seven-year moving averages for PCE inflation, or even a fixed starting point rather than a
moving average. St Louis Fed chief James Bullard considers a five-year window to be realistic,
while Charles Evans of the Chicago Fed mentions an asymmetric five-year averaging, with no
correction required for past overshooting of the inflation target.
All these versions of AIT could mean many years of deliberately generated and quite unnecessary
above-target inflation.
Arguments for AIT generally start with the correct observation that, because of the extremely low
level of the neutral real rate of interest, the effective lower bound on the Fed’s policy rates has
become a binding constraint. As a result, inflation in the US has been below target consistently
from the start of the financial crisis until the first quarter of 2021. Fear of the so-called
Japanification of the US economy — a combination of deflation and anaemic growth — has been
driving the Fed’s decisions until the recent overshooting of the inflation target put monetary policy
tightening back on the agenda.

It is bound to be the case that, when the economic system operates at the ELB for significant
chunks of time, even the most effective pursuit of the conventional inflation target will generate an
average inflation rate that is below target. Following the AIT approach of deliberately overshooting
the inflation target (during periods when the ELB does not constrain monetary policy) is indeed
likely to result in an average inflation rate closer to the target. But it would do so at the cost of
higher average absolute deviations (and higher average squared deviations) from the target rate.
Better to be below target when you cannot be on target and on target when you can be, than to be
below target when you cannot be on target and above target when you could be on target!
AIT is a form of price-level targeting. Yet basic economics teaches us that the price level is
irrelevant. Actual and anticipated future inflation rates matter. Inflation is a tax on nominal assets
and distorts relative price signals. Anticipated future inflation influences expected returns on a
range of assets.
Proponents of AIT care about past inflation, which can be indirectly relevant for monetary
policymakers if there are causal relationships between it and the objectives of monetary policy.
Contracts with lagged indexation clauses are one such channel. Past inflation can influence
expectations of future inflation which can in turn drive actual current and future inflation. When
he announced the adoption of AIT last year, Fed chair Jay Powell emphasised the inflation
expectations channel.
But there are other drivers of expected future inflation: past, present, and anticipated future money
growth, forward guidance, expected and unanticipated changes in the monetary and fiscal policy
regime, supply side developments, among many others. Even poorly informed economic agents
will learn to identify episodes when the ELB is a binding constraint on Fed policy.
Except in unlikely special cases, the role of past inflation in driving current and future inflation
expectations, and through them actual current and future inflation, will not call for anything like
an AIT rule.

The choice of average inflation targeting is economically illiterate. Why should unintended and
mostly unavoidable inflation targeting failures in the past justify future deliberate failures? And the
cost of adopting AIT could be serious: future periods of unnecessary, deliberate above-target
inflation. It is time to get rid of this potentially costly nonsense.
Letter in response to this article:
A broadside to appeal to old school central bankers / From Bill Smyth, Bagshot, Surrey, UK

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Willem Buiter
US inflation
Federal Reserve
Jerome H. Powell

