FT PROFESSIONAL

Chris Giles on Central Banks Global trade

Tariffs and taxes are not very inflationary
Households will pay, but probably not through much higher prices

Evidence suggests that the US overwhelmingly bears the costs of US tariffs, but exactly how these are passed to households remains
murky

Chris Giles
Published NOV 19 2024

This article is an on-site version of our Chris Giles on Central Banks newsletter. Premium
subscribers can sign up here to get the newsletter delivered every Tuesday. Standard
subscribers can upgrade to Premium here, or explore all FT newsletters

Raghuram Rajan, the University of Chicago professor and former Reserve Bank of India governor,
will receive the Bancor award in economics today. In his bleak acceptance speech, he notes the
world economy is “fragmenting slowly, but surely” and says much of this stems from “misdirected
anger at trade” when the big job killer in the US has been technology, not foreigners.

Perhaps most telling is the following passage:

After this gloomy assessment, in typical speeches the speaker pulls out their
magic solutions to all the problems that envelop us. Unfortunately, I have
none.
President-elect Donald Trump has certainly stoked anger in the US about trade. It is in many ways
odd that the US is most unhappy with trade because it is an extremely closed economy, as the chart
below shows.
Large economies will generally be more closed to external trade than smaller ones (hence the EU
and Eurozone are more closed than individual member states), but the US is in a league of its own
compared with the EU, China and India. None of this will matter. Tariffs are coming.
The questions are who will pay, and are tariffs inflationary?

The US is a remarkably closed economy
Goods trade (% of GDP)
Width of bars represents size of economy (Current PPP $)
Not EU

European group

EU member state

US

EU

India

China

Japan
Eurozone
UK

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

France
45

50

Canada
Italy
55

60

German
65

70

Source: ECB, World Bank, FT calculation

In the US presidential election, the effects of tariffs caused little academic disagreement. About 95
per cent of economists polled by the Kent Clark Center for Global Markets in September agreed or
strongly agreed with the statement that “imposing tariffs results in a substantial portion of the
tariffs being borne by consumers of the country that enacts the tariffs”.

This consensus did not extinguish all debate. In a remarkable online argument, Oren Cass, the
chief economist of American Compass, fought toe-to-toe with Justin Wolfers, a professor at the
University of Michigan, over just this issue and, in particular, the chart reproduced below. Cass
accused Wolfers of being simplistic in attributing relative price changes to tariffs and accused him
of cherry-picking data.
The common sense way to look at the chart is to say — as Wolfers did — that the 20 to 50 per cent
tariffs on imported washing machines between 2018 and 2023 raised consumer prices compared
with other appliances where no tariff was applied. There is a difficult period for this argument,
between mid-2019 and mid-2020, but this should not invalidate the position that US tariffs were
borne by the US.

Trump's tariffs on laundry equipment appeared to raise the price compared
with other appliances
Price level (Average 2017 = 100)

140

Tariffs
Tariffs

130

120

110

100

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

202
Source: BL

So far, the points have been anecdotal and we really need a more comprehensive account.
Theoretically, Trump is not necessarily wrong to say that the foreign exporter might bear the
burden of tariffs, so the outcome is an empirical issue.
There are many worthy academic studies of the Trump tariffs from 2018. While not the most
riveting reads, they give a reasonably clear account of the evidence. If you want to listen rather
than read, try Soumaya Keynes’ podcast this week with Kimberly Clausing. The evidence suggests:

US importers bore the vast majority of the cost of tariffs. Overall, for a 20
per cent tariff, the importer paid 18.9 per cent higher prices with the extariff price reducing just 1.1 per cent. Tariffs were passed on to US
importers much more than US exchange rate depreciations, where
contracts tend to be fixed for a period in dollars.
The one exception from this rule was for steel tariffs, a commodity used as
an intermediate good. Here, exporters to the US dropped prices
substantially to remain competitive.
While US importers paid, these costs were not always passed on directly to
US consumers. Washing machines were a bit of an exception where prices
rose. In other areas, prices barely increased. It is less certain whether
retailers spread the tariff effect over multiple goods, margins were squeezed
or products were bought ahead of tariffs being imposed.
Retaliation with tariffs imposed on imports of US goods was often
concentrated among homogenous agricultural products with many global
suppliers. US producers had to reduce their export prices in response.
The incidence of US tariffs clearly appears to fall on the US corporate sector, with it then passed on
to households in a combination of lower profits, higher prices and lower wages.

A new set of tariffs applied more aggressively, across the board and for longer can therefore be
expected to have significant detrimental effects on the US, although we must remember that the
country’s economy is relatively closed so these might not be huge.
The important point is that the evidence suggests the US overwhelmingly bears the costs, but
exactly how these are passed to households remains rather murky. The inflation effect does not
appear large.

OK, what about taxes?
British business leaders are angry with the new Labour government. The October 30 Budget raised
the UK’s main payroll tax, employers’ national insurance contributions, from 13.8 per cent to 15
per cent from next April and reduced tax-free thresholds.
Sainsbury’s, the country’s second-largest supermarket chain, said the additional costs it and its
suppliers faced would “feed through into higher inflation”. Saying much the same were companies
including the grocery and clothing retailer Marks and Spencer, the telecoms company BT and the
pub group Wetherspoons. Today, retailers have clubbed together to send a joint letter of complaint
to the chancellor.
In response, chancellor Rachel Reeves has sought to flatter. Companies can absorb the new tax
worth almost 1 per cent of GDP with greater efficiencies or lower profits, she says. “Businesses are
amazingly creative and have great ingenuity, and one of the things that they do really well is drive
efficiency and productivity performance,” she told MPs in a parliamentary hearing.
Just like tariffs, the likely outcome is an empirical question. The natural places for the tax to end up
are in lower wages, lower profits or higher prices.
There is pretty good evidence from the past. In the 2010s, employers were forced to contribute to
their employees’ defined contribution pensions in an auto-enrolment scheme, where the vast
majority of employees participated. As the chart below shows, it is not easy to see an impact of the
1 per cent, 2 per cent and 3 per cent compulsory contribution levels on trends in nominal wage
growth or inflation. Perhaps there was an effect in 2012, but this was much smaller than the
obvious exchange-rate impact on prices that caused the sterling’s plunge after the 2016 Brexit
referendum.

Compulsory UK employer pension contributions in the 2010s did not
obviously raise inflation or damp private sector pay growth
Annual change (%)
Shaded areas show compulsory employer pension contribution rates for auto-enrolled staff
Nominal private regular pay
6

CPI

Real private regular pay

1%
1%

2%
2%

Brexit
referendum

3%
3%

4
2

Inflation target

0
-2
-4
-6
2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

Sources: ONS, FT calculations • Pay variables are 3 month moving average

Luckily, we do not have to rely on seeking a signal in the noise of macro data because the UK’s
independent Office for Budget Responsibility has examined the evidence.
In a glorious moment of candour, professor David Miles, one of the OBR’s leading officials, told
members of parliament that the fiscal watchdog had examined a “quite big, very boring, academic
literature” on the subject of who pays. It had come to “central” estimates, “based on hundreds of
boring studies”. You can feel his pain.

Using the results of this tedious effort, the OBR has estimated that in the first year of operation, 40
per cent of the cost of higher employer NICs will hit profits, with 60 per cent being borne by
households in the form of lower wages and higher prices. After that, the incidence of the tax
increase is borne more by households with the split ending up as 76 per cent in lower real wages
and 24 per cent in lower profits. The OBR does not assume (correctly) that companies become
more efficient as a result of the tax — they already have an incentive to cut unnecessary costs.
Only 20 per cent of the effect on real wages is expected to come through higher prices, the OBR
estimated. A fifth of the 76 per cent of total annual revenue from the tax increase of £25bn suggests
£3.8bn of the money raised would result in a rise in nominal prices. With consumer spending of
roughly £1.65tn in 2023, it suggests a one-off price impact of 0.2 per cent, but spread over a period
longer than a year. This is precisely the effect the OBR has assumed.
The Bank of England has assumed much the same in the chart below. The direct effect of the
employer NICs increase on inflation in any one annual period (only mentioned in a chart footnote)
was about 0.1 per cent, and included in the “other Budget effects” category which also counted rises
in bus fares, higher car taxes and value added tax on private school fees. The exact number is
impossible to glean from BoE documents.
UK companies are justified in feeling angry since they have the hassle of passing a new tax on to
shareholders, customers and employees. It is probably best to ignore them, however, when they say
the move was inflationary.
Lots of boring studies suggest otherwise.

The BoE thinks increased national insurance barely affects inflation
CPI effect

Other Budget effects

Fuel duty

Spare capacity

0.4

0.2

0

-0.2
25
25
25
25
26
26
26
26
27
27
27
27
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Source: Bo

What I’ve been reading and watching
The FT’s trade writer Alan Beattie explains what Donald Trump can and
cannot do with tariffs and other whims
In the least surprising consequence of Trump’s victory, G20 initiatives are
already in trouble
The Federal Reserve’s Jay Powell is cooling on interest rate cuts only a
couple of months after a jumbo rate cut. Other Fed officials have made
similar noises, although the December rate cut does not appear to be off the
table yet

A chart that matters
With Trump having made multiple threats to the Fed’s independence, it is a good time to look at a
remarkable chart that documents the formal spread of central bank independence compiled by my
colleague Joel Suss. Although legal independence appears secure, it is gradually being undermined
in practice in many countries. Click on the chart to see the full measures of independence.

Central bank independence has increased substantially since 1940
Indices range from 0 to 1, with 1 being the highest level of independence
Filter by index sub-items
Overall index

0.7
0.65
0.6
0.55
0.5
0.45
1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

Source: Davide Rome
FT graphic: Joel Suss

Recommended newsletters for you
Free lunch — Your guide to the global economic policy debate. Sign up here
Trade Secrets — A must-read on the changing face of international trade and globalisation.
Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US trade
Global trade
Global inflation
Chris Giles on Central Banks
Chris Giles

