FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Central banks

Inequality is behind central bank dilemma
Stagflation would create devastating problems for weaker borrowers, notably
heavily indebted emerging economies.

MARTIN WOLF

© James Ferguson

Martin Wolf
Published SEP 21 2021

Why are central banks finding their job so hard to do? A common view is that this is because they
are imbeciles. People who assert this insist that central banks need to keep interest rates in line
with their historic norms. This is wrong, because historic norms are irrelevant. The questions are
why and what this implies for our economies.

A paper by Atif Mian, Ludwig Straub and Amir Sufi at the Jackson Hole monetary conference on 27
August illuminates this issue. It reaches a conclusion, already suggested in their earlier work: the
principal explanation for the decline in real interest rates has been high and rising inequality and
not demographic factors, such as the savings behaviour of the “baby-boom” generation over their
lifetimes, as some have argued.
The analysis starts with estimates of the real “natural rate” of interest, a concept that goes back to
the Swedish economist Knut Wicksell. The natural rate, he explained, balances demand and supply
in the economy, which shows itself in stable prices. The modern doctrine of inflation targeting has
descended from this idea. Crucially, however, estimates of this rate for the US show a fall from
about 4 per cent four decades ago to around zero now.
This decline is matched in other high-income countries, as one would expect: in an open world
economy, equilibrium real interest rates should converge. As the paper also notes, the decline
“raises concerns about secular stagnation, threatens asset price bubbles, and complicates monetary
policy”. Indeed, it is a big part of the reason why central banks have had to make huge asset
purchases in crisis situations, such as now.

Their main point is that savings rates vary far more by income within age cohorts than they do
across age cohorts. The differences are also huge: in the US, the top 10 per cent of households by
income have a savings rate between 10 and 20 percentage points higher than the bottom 90 per
cent. Given this divergence, the shift in the distribution of income towards the top inevitably raised
the overall propensity to save. As an explanation of rising propensities to save and the falling real
interest rate, the shift of the baby-boom generation into middle age does not work, because rising
savings have been continuous while the impact of the demographic shift on savings behaviour has
not.

At the aggregate level, savings must match investment. So what happens when the rich get richer
and so try to save more? Interest rates must fall. It turns out that the impact of this on business
investment is quite feeble. Indeed, the propensity to invest has been chronically weak, partly for
demographic reasons. So the offsets have had to come either from persistent fiscal deficits or from
higher spending by the bottom 90 per cent. Both are fuelled by debt, while the latter is also
powered by asset price bubbles, especially in house prices. As central banks pursue the natural rate
downwards, they drive both of these processes. But, as debt ratios rise, natural rates fall still
further, as the highly indebted become ever less creditworthy.

An objection to this argument is that it is just about one country, however important. But the
tendency towards more income inequality is shared by almost all large economies, including
notably China. Indeed, the excess savings of the rest of the world have also shown up in persistent
US current account deficits. The need to offset the latter has made the task of the Federal Reserve
yet more difficult.

The financial crisis of 2007-12 should be seen as an outcome of these processes, resolved at the
time by rescuing the financial system, tightening regulation and doubling down on low rates across
the yield curve. The Covid crisis was a bolt from the blue but the response was more of the same,
but on an even bigger scale. This time, moreover, the huge increases in central bank reserves
actually increased broader monetary aggregates. It is no great surprise, therefore, that the
combination of supply side disruptions with today’s strong demand are generating “surprise”
inflation.

So how might the story evolve? There is no powerful reason to expect income inequality, the
fundamental driver of today’s excess savings, to reverse, although it might stabilise. There is an
excellent reason for a huge investment boom, notably the climate transition. But that will not occur
without consistent, determined, intelligent and globally aware policymaking, none of which we can
expect, though we may hope. So, in the medium to long term, secular stagnation is likely to return,
unless income inequality falls.

The short term is harder to read, but if it goes wrong, is disturbing, perhaps even for the medium
term. In his speech at Jackson Hole, Jay Powell, chair of the Federal Reserve, insisted that all is
under control. But he would say that. The surge in inflation has in fact surprised almost everybody.
The worry must be that the price shocks persist and then get baked into expectations, which will
then only be reversed by a period of significantly higher short-term rates. That would cause
stagflation, which would create painful dilemmas for central banks and surely cause devastating
problems for weaker borrowers, notably but not exclusively heavily indebted emerging economies.
The exceptional policies of 2020 can no longer be justified. Given today’s super-low short-term
interest rates and supportive fiscal policies, it is hard to see why large asset purchases should
continue, either. We have more than enough money today and bond yields ought to rise a little.
When the facts change, central banks should change their minds. That time is now.
martin.wolf@ft.com
Follow Martin Wolf with myFT and on Twitter

​Letters in response to this article:
Economists have failed to anticipate pandemic risks / From Professor Tim Congdon, Chairman,
Institute of International Monetary Research, University of Buckingham, UK
Declining investment may explain why rates are low / From Marek Dabrowski, Non-Resident
Scholar, Bruegel, Brussels, Belgium

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Martin Wolf
Global Economy
US economy
Central banks
Monetary policy

