FT PROFESSIONAL

Letter

Letter: US inflation rate shows healthy signs of a growing economy
From Bill Smyth, Bagshot, Surrey, UK

© Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images

Published APR 24 2024

Amid the furore about whether the Federal Reserve will cut interest rates this year, Unhedged
raises an important question — “Are higher rates inflationary?” (Unhedged, FT.com, April 18).
While higher rates are probably not inflationary in aggregate, there is a good case for an
inflationary impact on some index components (eg housing), which may be having a bigger impact
than usual at the moment. Higher rates also send the message that inflation is high, which may
increase, or at least maintain, high consumer inflation expectations.

This is an important reminder that we should not assume too mechanical a link between interest
rates and inflation. Central bankers should not believe that there is such a link, nor be swayed by a
financial market narrative that assumes one. The underlying dilemma is that a fall in US consumer
price inflation from the 3-4 per cent range to around 2 per cent has rarely if ever been achieved
outside of recessions. The 1991 recession brought inflation down from the 3-5 per cent range
typical in the mid and late 1980s to about 2.5-3 per cent. Inflation again fell after the 2001
recession, but trended up to a peak of 5 per cent just before the 2008 financial crisis, which
predictably caused inflation to slump and remain below 2 per cent for much of the following
decade. Progress from today’s inflation of 3.5 per cent will be slow as workers and businesses take
time to adjust, but in a growing economy that is a healthy sign, not one we should be alarmed
about. It would take a recession or a positive supply shock to cause a rapid fall in inflation from
current levels.
Central bankers would be wise to have an easing bias, since they can easily react if growth and
inflation were to tear away again. What is sometimes called “opportunistic disinflation” — that is,
waiting for a positive supply shock to lower inflation rather than trying to engineer one through an
economic slowdown — has much to recommend it in the current environment. If the economy
went into recession, there would be a high risk of inflation falling below target, and it would be too
late to react by easing policy. We could be back in the world of quantitative easing again, which
nobody wants to return to.
Bill Smyth
Bagshot, Surrey, UK

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

