FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion US interest rates

An interesting disconnect in US rate-cut expectations
Economists and the Fed think similar things on what will happen to the US economy.
So why is there a big gap in their expectations for interest rates?

CLAIRE JONES

US Fed chair Jay Powell. Investors are wholly in sync with the US central bank’s three-cut view on rates, but many economists are not
© Al Drago/Bloomberg

Claire Jones in Washington
Published MAR 26 2024

This article is an on-site version of our Chris Giles on Central Banks newsletter. Sign up here to
get the newsletter sent straight to your inbox every Tuesday

Hi from Washington. I’m Claire Jones, the Financial Times’ acting US economics editor and I’m
standing in for Chris Giles this week.

When Jay Powell said in December that the Federal Reserve would lower interest rates by 25 basis
points three times in 2024, markets read that as many as six.
Three months later, investors are wholly in sync with the US central bank’s three-cut view. Many
economists, however, are not.
A week ahead of the Federal Open Market Committee’s March meeting, FT-Chicago Booth polled a
group of 38 academics to ask them what they thought would happen to the US economy this year.
They were decidedly more hawkish than either rate-setters or investors, with the bulk expecting
two or fewer cuts.
The Financial Times had the scoop and the story, published ahead of the Fed meeting, which is
here.
But now that we have the FOMC’s projections, we want to delve into a little more detail on how the
poll and the dot-plots stack up.
We want to see what the results might reveal about how the economists and the rate-setters differ
in their response to the latest — largely favourable — batch of data on the US economy. And
whether or not they have different risk appetites when it comes to deciding it’s time to declare
victory on the worst wave of inflation in a generation and finally cut rates from their current 23year high of 5.25 to 5.5 per cent.
First, here’s what the economists said when asked how many times they thought the Fed would cut
this year:

Here are the FOMC’s dot-plots in comparison:

Fed officials coalesce around 75 basis points of cuts in 2024
Each dot represents one FOMC participant's projection for the midpoint of US interest rates (%) from
every meeting since June 2023
Mar 2024

Dec 2023

Sep 2023

Jun 2023

6

Current rate
Current
rate

4

2

0

2024

2025

2026

Longer run

Source: Federal Reserve
FT graphic: Sam Learner

So what explains the disconnect?
It’s certainly not differences in how they view the economy’s prospects. Indeed, comparing the
economists’ estimates for growth, inflation and unemployment this year with those of the FOMC
would lead one to suspect that the academics would be keener on cuts than the rate-setters.

Those polled are even somewhat gloomier on the jobs market beyond 2024 — when asked what the
highest rate of unemployment would be over the next three years, the most common response was
between 4.5 and 5 per cent. The FOMC, meanwhile, expects the jobless rate to hit just 4.1 per cent
over its 2024-2026 forecast horizon.
The academic economists also view the risk of a recession this year as marginal, and believe that
the chances of core personal consumption expenditures, which measure how much consumers are
paying for goods and services excluding food and energy products, rising above 3 per cent are
relatively small.

This echoes the pronouncements of Fed officials, who believe both that inflation will not
substantially bounce back and that the US’s economic strength affords them the patience to act
only when they see further signs of price pressures dissipating.
The biggest difference between the two camps, then, is that the Fed is more willing to risk cutting
at a time when core inflation is still too high for comfort.
As monetary policy operates with a lag, taking broadly about 18 months for the impact of a change
to fully work through the economy, waiting until inflation is bang on 2 per cent isn’t necessarily a
good idea.
But what surprises us is that there can be similar takes on the near-term economic outlook yet
divergent views on how confident one can be that the FOMC can afford to cut as many as 75 basis
points this year. Fed officials, it appears, do have quite a big easing bias — at least when their
preferences on rates are set against those of the professors.

By the time we get the next set of poll results and dot plots, we’ll have seen the Consumer Price
Index releases up until May, and another three months’ worth of PCE data. That should offer a
better idea of whether three cuts — or two or fewer — look about right.
Have your own view on whether time is likely to prove the Fed or the academics right? Email me at
claire.jones@ft.com

What I’ve been reading and watching
Christine Murray’s piece on last week’s cut from the Central Bank of Mexico
charts how Latin America’s monetary guardians have managed to emerge
from the current rate cycle with their heads held high.
Torsten Sløk is the only economist working for a financial outfit that I’ve
come across saying that the Fed won’t cut rates at all this year. Read his
Unhedged interview to understand his scepticism.
As the Bank of Japan finally abandons negative interest rates, Aiden Reiter
and Leo Lewis explain what that means for the yen.

Recommended newsletters for you
Free Lunch — Your guide to the global economic policy debate. Sign up here
Trade Secrets — A must-read on the changing face of international trade and globalisation.
Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Claire Jones

Macroeconomics
Global Economy
US interest rates
Central banks

