FT PROFESSIONAL

Global Economy

A ‘milestone’ moment: why
economists think the global cycle of
rate rises is over
The world economy is showing signs of a
slowdown, fuelling investors’ hopes that
inflationary pressures are easing

The ECB’s Christine Lagarde, Jay Powell of the Fed and Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey © FT montage;
Bloomberg/WPA/Getty

Chris Giles and Valentina Romei in London, Colby Smith in Washington and Martin Arnold in Frankfurt
Published SEP 24 2023

As evidence mounts that global economic activity is slowing, economists, financial markets and
most central banks have become convinced that no further interest rate rises will be needed.
This week policymakers in the US, UK, Japan, and Switzerland all decided to keep rates on hold.
Central bankers stressed the need to hold their nerve rather than tighten policy further as inflation
continues to fall in most western nations.
“We have reached a milestone in the global monetary policy cycle,” said Jennifer McKeown, chief
global economist at Capital Economics. “The global monetary tightening cycle has ended.”

For the first time since the end of 2020, more of the world’s 30 largest central banks are expected
to cut rates in the next quarter than raise them, the consultancy said.
Financial markets have got the message: traders now price in no further rate rises from most major
central banks and cuts by those in many emerging economies.
Nathan Sheets, chief economist at US bank Citi, said the global economy was approaching a
“transition point” of lower growth and inflation.
“We’re seeing evidence of a new regime characterised by gradual disinflation and decelerating
growth,” Sheets said.

Cuts in interest rates are set to outnumber increases among the world's 30
largest central banks
Increase

30
25
20
15
10
5
0
-5

Cut

The change in attitude follows reports of a slowdown in inflation in many countries and OECD
forecasts showing that the steep increase in rates and a recent rise in oil prices to around $95 a
barrel were generating “increasingly visible” signs of slowing growth.
Central banks are beginning to respond to this data. Many emerging economies have started
cutting rates while decisions to hold rather than raise borrowing costs at the Bank of England and
Swiss National Bank surprised economists.
Monetary policymakers in leading economies are not yet willing to talk about the possibility of rate
cuts and are seeking to hold firm until there is more certainty that they have restored price
stability.
The European Central Bank raised borrowing costs last week, but Philip Lane, its chief economist,
said on Thursday that interest rates were on track to defeat inflation providing they were
“maintained for a sufficiently long duration” at current levels. It was the bank’s strongest signal so
far that eurozone rates are likely to have peaked.
The Bank of England members who voted to hold rates also stressed the need to keep monetary
policy “restrictive” until material progress had been made against inflation, rather than pushing for
further tightening of policy.
In the US, Fed chair Jay Powell reaffirmed the central bank’s belief that it needs to keep rates
higher for longer to account for the fact that growth has held up surprisingly well in the world’s
largest economy.
Richard Clarida, who previously served as the Fed’s vice-chair and is now at bond manager Pimco,
said this approach reflected the central bank’s “resolve” to insure against inflation proving
persistent. He said the next moves by the Fed, ECB and BoE would all be “data-dependent” and
they would all be “jealously guarding” their reputations for price stability.

Annual % change in consumer price index
Choose countries...

UK

US

France

12

10

8

6

Still, many economists questioned whether the Fed will need to be as aggressive on rates as US
prices stabilise, especially given a tightening of financial conditions that many believe could offset
the need for a final rise projected by officials in their updated economic forecasts published this
week.
Powell made clear that the Fed’s decision to hold rates steady should not be interpreted as a signal
the central bank thought it had reached the end point of its tightening campaign.
But the rosier outlook, especially on growth and unemployment, appeared fanciful to some.
Monica Defend, head of the Amundi Institute, warned: “The Fed has done too much and this
amount of lagged tightening will harm the economy eventually.”

The pause in rate rises comes as inflation has eased sharply in many regions. In the US, the pace of
price growth has more than halved from a peak of 9.1 per cent in June 2022 to 3.7 per cent last
month.
In some Baltic and eastern European countries, inflation is down by more than 10 percentage
points from the peak. In the coming week official data is expected to show that eurozone inflation
fell close to a two-year low of 4.6 per cent in September, down from 5.2 per cent in August and a
peak of 10.6 per cent last October.
At the same time, economic activity has weakened. September’s purchasing manager indices, a key
measure of economic performance, indicated weakness in the UK and the eurozone, while the US
registered a further slowdown.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
Global inflation
Central banks
Monetary policy
Federal Reserve

