FT PROFESSIONAL

Disrupted Times Covid-19

No short-term solutions to inflation
Expectations of a drop in US consumer price index, but Fed’s rate-raising policy likely to continue

The US publishes August inflation figures tomorrow with analysts expecting a slight fall in the headline figure © AFP via Getty
Images

Jonathan Moules
Published SEP 12 2022

This article is an onsite version of our Disrupted Times newsletter. Sign up here to get the
newsletter sent straight to your inbox three times a week

Good evening

The ever-present menace of inflation is rising to the fore again this week. The US publishes August
inflation figures tomorrow and economists polled by Reuters expect the consumer price index to
fall 0.1 per cent month on month, after remaining flat in July, with a year-on-year reading of 8.1
per cent for August, down from 8.5 per cent a month earlier.
However, do not expect such positive news to moderate the Federal Reserve’s aggressive push to
tame cost of living increases. Chair Jay Powell and vice-chair Lael Brainard vowed last week to
keep raising rates, fuelling expectations that a third consecutive 0.75 percentage point increase will
be implemented later this month.
The mood was reflected in the currency markets, with the dollar beginning the week on a downbeat
note as traders priced in a narrowing of the policy differences between the Fed and other central
banks.
Meanwhile, India has imposed export controls on various varieties of rice in an effort to shore up
food security and constrain its inflation rate, rising because of supply disruptions stemming from
the Covid-19 pandemic and the war in Ukraine. However, the move is also likely to increase
inflation elsewhere — given that rice is one of the most commonly eaten staple foods globally.
The Ukraine invasion continues to fuel rising commodity and energy costs, hitting Europe
particularly hard. Although Ukrainian forces’ surprisingly rapid success in recapturing territory
from Russian forces has raised hopes of a turning point in the nearly seven-month conflict, the war
and its impact on the global economy is far from over.
Ukraine’s military success throws the conflict into an even more dangerous phase as Russia tries to
regroup and perhaps escalate its attacks, according to FT columnist Gideon Rachman. All of which
means we must brace ourselves for many more months of disrupted times.

Latest news
Russia will push on with Ukraine war until all military goals are met,
Kremlin says

Anti-immigrant Sweden Democrats celebrate election gains
Hong Kong must boost vaccinations before Covid rules are lifted, says
minister
For up-to-the-minute news updates, visit our live blog

Need to know: the economy
China has emerged as a rival to the IMF in the volume of emergency loans being provided to
nations at risk of financial crisis. Pakistan, Sri Lanka and Argentina have together received more
than $32bn since 2017, data show.
There is a sense of enlightened self-interest at work here. Analysts said that in most cases the
objective of the emergency lending was to prevent defaults on infrastructure loans extended under
China’s Belt and Road Initiative. However, FT senior trade writer Alan Beattie warns that the lack
of oversight of these bilateral lending arrangements is a real danger (premium subscribers only).

Latest for the UK and Europe
The UK economy stagnated in the three months to July, with output flat over the period, down
from growth of 0.3 per cent in the three months to April.

There was better news in the protracted battle between the UK and the EU over the Northern
Ireland protocol, with Brussels offering a plan to cut physical customs checks across the Irish Sea
to just a few lorries a day.
Maroš Šefčovič, the EU’s Brexit chief, expressed hope that the proposal could smooth the way to a
deal with newly appointed British prime minister Liz Truss over post-Brexit trading arrangements
in Northern Ireland.

Global latest
The renminbi is on course for its largest annual fall on record against the dollar despite Beijing
taking its strongest steps to stem the currency’s decline. Covid lockdowns and sputtering economic
growth have helped pile pressure on to China’s currency.
The drop of 8.7 per cent against the greenback this year (to Rmb6.96) puts the renminbi on track
for its biggest yearly decline since China abandoned its longstanding currency peg and moved to a
managed floating exchange rate in 2005.

Need to know: business
The energy crisis should be a spur to a regulatory overhaul of the sector, similar to the more robust
oversight of banks after the 2008 financial crisis, FT deputy editor Patrick Jenkins writes in the
Inside Business column today.
In the meantime, companies are doing what they can to minimise the upset. Some of Europe’s
most energy-intensive industries — including some of the world’s largest steelmakers — are finding
ways of cutting back on their power use, our correspondents report.
High inflation has made people reluctant to splash out on new washing machines and other white
goods, appliance maker Electrolux has warned. The company, which is undertaking a major costcutting exercise as a result, said the problem had been exacerbated by high levels of inventory at
retailers. It warned that third-quarter earnings would decline significantly compared with the
second quarter.
Wall Street is staging a counter-offensive in its war with Silicon Valley for talent, attracting
computer engineers frustrated by the hiring freezes and lay-offs among embattled cryptocurrency
and tech ventures, according to FT correspondents in New York.

The World of Work
Corporate headshots are being taken far too seriously, according to FT columnist Pilita Clark. A
click on the gymnastic LinkedIn profile pic of Klarna co-founder and CEO Sebastian Siemiatkowski
is perhaps the most extreme example.
Making yourself indispensable at work may seem like a good career move but the reality is that it is
a curse, resulting in burnout for you and resentment from your colleagues, as Miranda Green
explains.

Covid cases and vaccinations
Total global cases: 601.3mn

Total doses given: 12.6bn

Get the latest worldwide picture with our vaccine tracker

Some good news . . .
A tiny particle that can travel through concrete could save many lives, detecting faults inside
buildings before they collapse. Geoff Manaugh explains the magic of muons.

Recommended newsletters
Working it — Discover the big ideas shaping today’s workplaces with a weekly newsletter from
work & careers editor Isabel Berwick. Sign up here
The Climate Graphic: Explained — Understanding the most important climate data of the week.
Sign up here

Thanks for reading Disrupted Times. If this newsletter has been forwarded to you, please sign
up here to receive future issues. And please share your feedback with us at
disruptedtimes@ft.com. Thank you

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
Covid-19
Disrupted Times
Jonathan Moules

