FT PROFESSIONAL
UPDATED 4 YEARS AGO

Live news updates from April 13: Jersey freezes $7bn worth of assets
linked to Abramovich, Subway attack suspect arrested in New York
City
Today’s top headlines:

• Finland to decide on Nato application in ‘weeks’
• Subway attack suspect arrested in New York City, US media reports
• EU ban on Russian energy would spark ‘sharp recession’ in Germany
• Jersey freezes $7bn worth of assets linked to Abramovich
• Bank of Canada lifts interest rates in attempt to anchor inflation expectations
Edited by
Peter Wells, Alexandra White, Mamta Badkar, Leke Oso Alabi, Eva Szalay, Robert
Wright, Oliver Ralph, Sarah Provan and William Langley

Apr 13, 17:55

Lauren Fedor in Washington

Psaki defends Biden’s description of Putin’s
action as ‘genocide’

US President Joe Biden in Des Moines, Iowa, on April 12, 2022 after saying Russia’s war in Ukraine
amounted to a ‘genocide’ © AP

White House press secretary Jen Psaki defended recent
comments from the US president, noting Joe Biden used the
word “genocide” to describe Vladimir Putin’s actions in Ukraine
“not once, but twice”.
“The president was speaking to what we all see, what he feels is
clear as day in terms of the atrocities happening on the
ground,” Psaki said on Wednesday.
The White House press secretary declined to say if the
president’s comments on Tuesday were planned or off the cuff,
but insisted Biden was the ultimate decision maker in his
administration.

“He is the president of the United States and the leader of the
free world, and he is allowed to make his views known at any
point he would like,” Psaki said, adding: “We shouldn’t
misunderstand who he is and where he stands on the totem
pole, which is at the top.”
Psaki refused to say specifically whether the president was
articulating his personal views or an official shift in US foreign
policy, but said his comments reflected a commitment Biden
made on the campaign trail as a presidential candidate.
“When the president ran, he promised the American people he
would ‘shoot from the shoulder’ is his phrase that he often uses,
and tell it to them straight,” Psaki said.
“His comments yesterday, not once but twice, and on war
crimes are an exact reflection of that,” she added. “The
president was calling it like he sees it, and that is what he does.”

Apr 13, 16:54

George Steer and Tommy Stubbington in London and Nicholas Megaw in New
York

Bets on tamer Fed policy stance support
rally in US stocks, Treasuries

US government debt extended a rally on Wednesday as traders
pared back their bets on an aggressive series of interest rate
rises from the Federal Reserve this year.

The two-year Treasury yield, which is highly sensitive to
monetary policy expectations, sank as much as 0.14 percentage
points to 2.27 per cent, its lowest level this month. Yields fall
when prices rise.
It later reversed some of the move to trade at 2.35 per cent,
down 0.06 percentage points for the day.
Futures markets show investors now expect the Fed to raise
rates by a further 2 percentage points by the end of the year,
down a quarter of a percentage point from earlier in the week.
The moves came after Tuesday’s US consumer price data
showed closely watched “core” inflation, which strips out
volatile energy and food prices, slowed unexpectedly in March.
The annual headline figure increased 8.5 per cent, slightly
above analysts’ expectations.
The yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note fell 0.03
percentage points to 2.69 per cent.
The shift in interest rate expectations also lifted stock markets,
particularly high-growth technology stocks that are considered
to be particularly vulnerable to higher rates. The US benchmark
S&P 500 index added 1.1 per cent, while the tech-heavy Nasdaq
Composite rose 2 per cent.
Read more on the day’s market moves here

Apr 13, 16:40

Dave Lee in San Francisco

Amazon hits US sellers with surcharge to
offset inflation and fuel costs

© (c) Dimarik16 | Dreamstime.com

Amazon is adding a 5 per cent surcharge to its delivery fees in
response to rising fuel costs and inflation, the company told its
third-party sellers on Wednesday.
The fee, which takes effect April 28, will be applied to US sellers
using Amazon’s logistics network to deliver products, known as
Fulfillment By Amazon. It is not intended to be permanent, nor
will it be passed on to consumers directly.
The fee will be added to the per-unit delivery cost, not the
overall product price, a spokesperson said. For instance, the
cost to deliver a T-shirt would rise from $5.07 to $5.32. The
average rise will be 24 cents per package.

While the company does not disclose how many packages it
ships, an estimate from logistics consultancy MWPVL
suggested 3.25bn packages from third-party sellers were sent to
US customers via Fulfillment By Amazon in 2021.
The surcharge does not apply to deliveries made by other
companies, such as the US Postal Service or UPS.
In a message sent to sellers on Wednesday, Amazon said it had,
until now, absorbed some of the increased costs of doing
business, such as adding more than 750,000 new workers,
increasing wages and rapidly increasing its warehousing
footprint.
“In 2022, we expected a return to normalcy as Covid-19
restrictions around the world eased, but fuel prices and
inflation have presented further challenges,” the statement
read.
“It’s still unclear if these inflationary costs will go up or down,
or for how long they will persist.”
Read more on Amazon’s seller surcharge here

Apr 13, 15:28

Alexandra White in New York

Sri Lanka pushed deeper into junk territory
by S&P Global and Fitch
S&P Global and Fitch Ratings pushed Sri Lanka’s credit rating
deeper into junk territory after the country suspended
payments on its foreign debt, with the latter saying this marked
the start of a sovereign default process.
S&P Global on Wednesday cut Sri Lanka’s long-term foreign
currency sovereign rating to “CC” from “CCC”, with a negative
outlook, “to reflect the virtual certainty of a default on some
affected obligations”.
Fitch Ratings followed suit by downgrading Sri Lanka’s longterm foreign-currency issuer default rating to “C” from “CC”,
noting that the downgrade reflects the rating agency’s view that
“a sovereign default process has begun”.
The moves came after the Sri Lankan finance ministry
suspended payments on its government bonds saying that
keeping up with repayments had “become impossible.”
The country has a total of about $35bn in external government
debt outstanding, with $7bn in payments due this year.
President Gotabaya Rajapaksa’s government is grappling with
an escalating political and economic crisis. The country’s
cabinet resigned en masse earlier this month following
nationwide protests over blackouts and soaring food and fuel
prices.

“Failure to establish a sustainable government could further
complicate and hinder progress in discussions with the IMF,
and, ultimately, delay a debt restructuring plan,” S&P analysts
Andrew Wood and Rain Yin said.
Sri Lanka’s foreign currency rating could descend to “selective
default” for the S&P and “restricted default” for Fitch upon
confirmation that the government missed a coupon or principal
payment on commercial foreign currency debt. The country is
widely expected to miss its next coupon payment due April 18.
Sri Lanka has turned to the IMF for financial assistance and to
draft a recovery plan, but S&P cautioned that negotiations are
in the early stages and the country’s debt restructuring process
may take months to complete.

Apr 13, 15:01

Roman Olearchyk in Kyiv

Russia threatens retaliation on Ukrainian
cities if Kyiv continues strikes

A residential building hit in a military strike in Kharkiv, Ukraine, April 10, 2022. © Reuters

Russia’s defence ministry warned it would conduct more severe
strikes on government buildings in Kyiv and other cities if
Ukrainian forces continue conducting hits on targets within
Russian soil.
“We see attempts of sabotage and attacks by Ukrainian troops
on facilities in Russia,” Igor Konashenkov, spokesperson for
Russia’s defence ministry, said in a Telegram social media post
on Wednesday.
“If such cases continue, the Russian armed forces will strike at
decision-making centers, including in Kyiv, which the Russian
army has previously refrained from.”

It was not immediately clear what strikes on Russian turf he
was referring to. But explosions did occur this month at an oil
refinery and army depot in Belgorod region of Russia just north
of the Ukrainian city of Kharkiv. Ukrainian officials have not
taken credit for these incidents.
Russia, since launching its invasion in February, has conducted
missile strikes on cities across Ukraine, including the capital
Kyiv. It has hit regional government buildings in Kharkiv and
Mykolayiv in the east and south of Ukraine, respectively.
Russian shelling and air strikes have decimated the port city of
Mariupol, destroying residential buildings, government
quarters and hospitals alike.
“Russia’s own provocations are preparing an excuse for another
threat,” Andriy Yermak, chief of staff to Ukraine’s president,
said in response to Russia’s new warning.
“They have already talked about possible missile strikes on
Kyiv. We are ready for any scenario and no Russian one will
work,” Yermak continued.
Russian and Ukrainian military claims cannot be
independently verified.

Apr 13, 14:59

Stephen Morris in London

Barclays in BoE crosshairs over ‘gaming the
rules’ with pension deals
Bank of England regulators have warned lenders about “gaming
the rules” with capital arbitrage transactions via their pension
schemes, a move largely directed at Barclays, which has used
such deals to boost its capital level.
On Wednesday, the Prudential Regulation Authority released a
strongly-worded statement criticising the use of “deficit
reduction transactions with their defined-benefit pension
schemes that are structured to limit the regulatory capital
impact”.
It said the tactics were legally risky, as well as “complex,
artificial and opaque” in a way that “undermines the
calibration” of capital levels.
“We also draw firms’ attention to the PRA’s approach . . . Our
policies should be followed ‘in line with their spirit and
intended outcome, not managing the business only to the letter,
or gaming the rules’,” the regulator added.
While the statement did not single out any banks, people
familiar with the matter said the main target was Barclays.
Analysts at Autonomous and Numis said that it was the only
UK lender that had used the tactic in recent years.
Barclays and the PRA declined to comment.

Should the PRA demand that the transactions be unwound,
Barclays could take a £1.25bn hit to its core capital buffer years
earlier than planned, according to analysts. That is equivalent,
after tax, to a 30 basis point reduction from its current 15.1 per
cent common equity tier 1 ratio.
Read more on the warning from BoE regulators here

Apr 13, 14:43

George Steer and Tommy Stubbington in London and Nicholas Megaw in New
York

Treasuries extend rally as traders weigh
future direction of monetary policy

US government debt rallied on Wednesday as traders pared
back their bets on an aggressive series of interest rate rises from
the Federal Reserve this year.
The two-year Treasury yield, which is highly sensitive to
monetary policy expectations, sank as much as 0.14 percentage
points to 2.27 per cent, its lowest level this month. Yields fall
when prices rise.
By mid-afternoon in New York it had given up some of the
move to trade at 2.35 per cent, down 0.06 percentage points for
the day.

Futures markets show investors now expect the Federal
Reserve to raise rates by a further 2 percentage points by the
end of the year, down a quarter of a percentage point from
earlier in the week.
The moves came after Tuesday’s US consumer price data
showed closely watched “core” inflation, which strips out
volatile energy and food prices, slowed unexpectedly in March.
The annual headline figure increased 8.5 per cent, slightly
above analysts’ expectations.
The yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note fell 0.04
percentage points to 2.68 per cent.
Data on Wednesday showed US producer prices last month
rose at an annual rate of 11.2 per cent, well above economists’
expectations.
In equity markets, the benchmark S&P 500 index added 0.9 per
cent, while the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite rose 1.7 per cent.
The gauges ended Tuesday lower, having initially rallied in the
wake of the March inflation data release.
Read more on the day’s market moves here

Apr 13, 14:12

Joshua Chaffin in New York

Subway attack suspect arrested in New York
City, US media reports

A New York Police officer of the anti terrorism unit patrols the 36th St subway station on April 13, 2022, a
day after a shooting incident took place in Brooklyn. © Reuters

The suspect in a New York City subway shooting that left 10
people wounded and traumatised the city was arrested by
police on Wednesday.
Frank James, a 62-year-old man police had been seeking in the
wake of Tuesday’s attack, was in police custody, according to
US media reports, which said he was found wandering
Manhattan’s East Village.
James is suspected by police of setting off two smoke grenades
and then firing at least 33 bullets from a 9-millimetre handgun
at subway passengers.

Apr 13, 13:24

Sebastian Payne in London

UK justice minister Wolfson resigns over
partygate revelations
A Conservative justice minister has resigned from Boris
Johnson’s government over the “scale, context and nature” of
breaches of coronavirus regulations in Whitehall.
Lord David Wolfson, who was appointed to the Ministry of
Justice in December 2020, quit “with considerable regret” on
Wednesday following the Met’s decision to issue fines to the
prime minister and chancellor Rishi Sunak.
Wolfson said he could not remain in office due to the
revelations that lawbreaking had taken place at the heart of
Johnson’s government.
“It would be inconsistent with the rule of law for that conduct to
pass with constitutional impunity, especially when many in
society complied with the rules at great personal cost, and
others were fined or prosecuted for similar, and sometimes
apparently more trivial, offences,” he said.
In his resignation letter, the peer, who is also a prominent
barrister, said the prime minister’s own conduct was to blame
for his resignation.
“It is not just a question of what happened in Downing Street,
or your own conduct. It is also, and perhaps more so, the
official response to what took place.”

My letter to the Prime Minister today. pic.twitter.com/lADCvKDKbB
— David Wolfson (@DXW_KC) April 13, 2022

Apr 13, 12:58

Steff Chávez in Chicago and Kiran Stacey in Washington

US to extend mask mandate for aeroplanes
and other public transport

© Bloomberg

The US will extend a public transportation mask mandate for 15
days while the country’s top public health agency monitors a
recent rise in coronavirus cases.
The federal mandate, which requires travellers on public
transport including aeroplanes, trains and buses to wear masks,
was set to expire on April 18.

“In order to assess the potential impact the rise of cases has on
severe disease, including hospitalisations and deaths, and
healthcare system capacity, the CDC order will remain in place
at this time,” the US Centers for Disease Control said.
“The Transportation Security Administration has decided to
extend the security directive and emergency amendment for 15
days, through May 3, 2022,” the CDC continued.
The public health agency also said it would change its alert
system for international travel, so travellers will only be warned
to avoid visiting a country in extraordinary circumstances, such
as the emergence of a dangerous new variant, rather than
anywhere where the spread of Covid-19 is deemed very high.
This Level 4 category currently applies to a wide list of
countries, including most of Europe and Australia.
The Biden administration has been pressured by the travel
industry and Republican politicians to lift the mask mandate.
Domestic airline executives have cited threats to the safety of
airline employees, as they are essentially tasked with policing
mask wearing.
The Transport Security Administration, which is responsible for
airport security, indicated in March that government agencies
are working with the CDC on “a revised policy framework” for
when, and under what circumstances, masks should be
required on forms of public transport.

Covid-19 cases are “starting to tick up a little bit,” particularly
in areas including northern New England, New York, Colorado
and Washington, DC, said David Dowdy, an epidemiologist at
the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.
Philadelphia on Monday became the first major US city to
reimpose an indoor mask mandate.
Airlines have also called for an end to pre-departure testing
requirements for international travel. Lifting them is expected
to further increase demand for travel.

Apr 13, 11:43

Clive Cookson in London

European Space Agency ends co-operation
with Russia on moon missions

The European Space Agency had already ended its work with Russia on the ExoMars rover mission ©
Andre Pain/AFP via Getty Images

The European Space Agency (ESA) has ended its co-operation
with Russia on three unmanned moon missions, in response to
that country’s “aggression against Ukraine”.
The body announced on Wednesday it would withdraw
equipment and instruments from the Russian Luna-25, Luna26 and Luna-27 missions that were planned over the next few
years. But it has already made alternative arrangements for
some of them.

A European experimental navigation camera was due to fly on
the Luna-25 lander later this year. Josef Aschbacher, ESA
director-general, said he had asked his counterpart at
Roscosmos, Russia’s space agency, to remove the instrument
from the craft and store it safely until it could be retrieved.
Instead, the camera will travel to the moon on Nasa’s Peregrine
lander.
Aschbacher said ESA was arranging for its contributions to
later Luna missions, including a lunar drill and chemical
analyser, to be carried on American and Japanese landers.
ESA and Russia had already ended their partnership on the
ExoMars Rover mission, but they continue to work with Nasa
on joint operations at the International Space Station.

Apr 13, 11:24

Roman Olearchyk in Kyiv

Zelensky makes English-language appeal
for more weaponry
Ukraine’s president has made an English-language video appeal
to the world for more weaponry to help his country fend off
Russia’s army, which is amassing forces in the eastern Donbas
region.

“Freedom must be armed better then tyranny. Western
countries have everything to make it happen,” Volodymyr
Zelensky said in a video posted on social media on Wednesday.
“Russia launched a full-scaled war against Ukraine on February
24. Now it’s April. Russia counted on capturing Ukraine within
five days . . . But they had no idea who they were up against.
Russia didn’t know how much we cherish our freedom,” he
said.
Zelensky said Ukrainian forces, armed with western-supplied
precision anti-tank busters and stinger missiles as well as lethal
Turkish drones, had “destroyed more Russian weapons and
military equipment then some armies in Europe currently
possess”.
“But this is not enough. Russia still has the capacity to attack
and not only against Ukraine,” he added.
The Baltics, formerly under Soviet occupation, as well as other
eastern European countries would be the “next targets if the
freedom of Ukraine falls,” Zelensky said.
“The images of Bucha and Mariupol have demonstrated real
Russia’s intentions to the whole world. It could only be stopped
by force of arms. It must be done now. Ukraine needs weapons
supplies,” he said.

Apr 13, 11:19

Alexandra White in New York

Bank of Canada lifts interest rate 0.5% in
effort to anchor inflation expectations

The central bank, one of many enacting tighter monetary policy, said on Wednesday it would end its bondbuying programme this month © Chris Wattie/Reuters

Canada’s central bank has raised its benchmark interest rate by
half a percentage point and announced an end its bond-buying
programme in an effort to prevent inflation expectations from
becoming “entrenched”.
The Bank of Canada (BoC) lifted the main interest rate to 1 per
cent, a move widely expected by economists and its biggest
increase since May 2000.
In an effort to shrink its balance sheet, the bank said it would
end its bond-buying programme on April 25 and would not
replace maturing government of Canada bonds.

Surging inflation and a tight labour market have added to
pressure on central bank policymakers to aggressively raise
interest rates.
Canada’s unemployment rate last month fell to 5.3 per cent, its
lowest level on record. The war in Ukraine has further stoked
inflation by pushing up oil and natural gas prices and
exacerbated supply chain disruptions.
Consumer price index inflation is now expected to average
almost 6 per cent in the first half of this year, the BoC said, up
from the 5 per cent forecast it provided in January. The Bank
said it could be 2024 before CPI inflation returns to its 2 per
cent target.
The BoC acknowledged those factors in its decision to
aggressively raise rates. It warned “there is an increasing risk
that expectations of elevated inflation could become
entrenched” and that interest rates “will need to rise further” to
prevent that.
A growing number of central banks are enacting tighter
monetary policy in the wake of surging inflation, with New
Zealand policymakers the latest to take action. The US Federal
Reserve will probably raise its benchmark rate by half a
percentage point at its next meeting.

Apr 13, 10:58

Colby Smith in New York

Yellen warns of consequences for China if it
undermines Russia sanctions

Treasury secretary Janet Yellen said on Wednesday that the US was committed to Russia’s ‘economic,
financial and strategic isolation’ so long as the war in Ukraine lasts © Jacquelyn Martin/AP

US Treasury secretary Janet Yellen warned of economic and
financial consequences for China and other countries that have
maintained ties with Russia if they attempt to undermine the
sweeping sanctions package unveiled by western allies.
In remarks on Wednesday, Yellen spoke of Washington’s
commitment to push Russia further towards “economic,
financial and strategic isolation” so long as it continues its
attacks on Ukraine.
She singled out China and other countries who are “sitting on
the fence, perhaps seeing an opportunity to gain by preserving
their relationship with Russia and backfilling the void left by
others”.

“The unified coalition of sanctioning countries will not be
indifferent to actions that undermine the sanctions we’ve put in
place,” Yellen said at an event hosted by the Atlantic Council,
noting specifically Beijing’s “special relationship” with Russia.
“China cannot expect the global community to respect its
appeals to the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity
in the future if [it] does not respect these principles now when
it counts,” she cautioned. “The world’s attitude towards China
and its willingness to embrace further economic integration
may well be affected by China’s reaction to our call for resolute
action on Russia.”

Apr 13, 10:34

Nastassia Astrasheuskaya in Riga

Biden’s genocide comments ‘unacceptable’,
says Kremlin
US president Joe Biden’s claims of a genocide in Ukraine were
“unacceptable”, said Russian president Vladimir Putin’s
spokesperson on Wednesday, as he dismissed the idea of a
prisoner exchange proposed by Kyiv.
The comments come in response to Biden saying on Tuesday
that Putin’s actions in Russia constituted genocide. Biden had
previously described events in Ukraine as war crimes.

“We categorically disagree with him,” Dmitry Peskov said on
Wednesday, adding that such a description distorted events. “It
is . . . unacceptable from the president of the United States of
America,” he added.
Peskov dismissed a proposed exchange of Ukrainian opposition
figure Viktor Medvedchuk for military hostages, saying the
swap put forward by Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelensky
was impossible as “Medvedchuk is not a Russian citizen”.
“He is a foreign politician,” Peskov said. “He has never had
behind-the-curtain relations with Russia.”
Peskov said that had Medvedchuk had ties to Russia, he would
have left Ukraine before the launch of what the Kremlin calls a
special military operation.

Apr 13, 09:54

Robert Wright in London

Jersey freezes $7bn worth of assets linked to
Abramovich
A court in Jersey has imposed an order freezing more than
$7bn in assets belonging to Roman Abramovich in the latest
blow to the Russian oligarch’s fortune.
The order comes after the island’s police searched premises
“suspected to be connected to the business activities of Roman
Abramovich”.

“The Royal Court also imposed a formal freezing order on 12
April . . . over assets understood to be valued in excess of $7
billion which are suspected to be connected to Mr Abramovich,”
the government said.
The assets are either located in Jersey or owned by entities
incorporated on the island, the government added.
Since the start of the war in Ukraine, UK authorities have
forced Abramovich to sell Chelsea Football Club and his yachts
have had to flee harbours to avoid being seized. Meanwhile,
trading in Evraz, the aluminium maker that earned Abramovich
his fortune, remains suspended.
Jersey’s government said it would make no further comment
beyond the announcement of the freezing order and search.

Apr 13, 08:45

Colby Smith in New York

US producer prices hit record 11.2% in
March
US producer price growth surged to a record in March, as the
effects of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine rippled through the
world’s largest economy.

The producer price index, which tracks the prices businesses
receive for their goods and services, rose 11.2 per cent last
month compared with March last year, the Bureau of Labor
Statistics said on Wednesday.
That was the quickest pace since the year-on-year rate was first
calculated in 2010 and well above economists’ expectations.
February’s annual pace was revised higher by 0.3 percentage
points, to 10.3 per cent.
On a monthly basis, producer prices advanced 1.4 per cent, an
acceleration from the upwardly revised 0.9 per cent pace
registered previously.
After stripping out volatile items such as food, energy and
trade, “core” prices jumped 7 per cent from the same time last
year, up from 6.7 per cent in February.
US consumer prices rose 8.5 per cent in March, the fastest pace
since January 1981, as a run-up in energy and food prices
ignited by the war in Ukraine exacerbated price pressures.
“Core” inflation rose less than expected, but was still up 6.6 per
cent on the year.
The Federal Reserve has vowed to tackle high inflation and
appears prepared to dramatically speed up the pace at which it
is raising interest rates at its next policy meeting in May, having
increased the federal funds rate by a quarter of a percentage
point last month.

Half-point interest rate increases are now on the table for May
and potentially at subsequent gatherings as policymakers move
to get rates to a more “neutral” setting that ceases to continue
stimulating the economy.
The Fed will soon begin shrinking its $9tn balance sheet as part
of its efforts to tighten monetary policy this year.

Apr 13, 08:30

Robert Wright in London

‘Cold and calculated’ Amess killer
sentenced to life in prison
The man who killed a UK Conservative MP in an Islamistinspired stabbing was sentenced on Wednesday to life in prison
for the murder and for plotting a separate terror attack.
The sentencing on Wednesday came two days after a jury at
London’s Old Bailey found Ali Harbi Ali, 26, guilty of the
murder last year of the Tory MP for Southend West. Ali was
also found guilty of a second offence of preparing for acts of
terrorism.
Ali said he attacked Amess over his support for air strikes on
Syria.

Amess’s murder sparked renewed concern about the safety of
UK politicians when meeting members of the public in their
constituencies. Another MP, Jo Cox, was fatally shot and
stabbed several times in her constituency a week before the UK
voted in the EU membership referendum of 2016.
Matt Jukes, head of counter terrorism policing at London’s
Metropolitan Police, investigated the murder and said it was
clear Ali was a “cold, calculated and dangerous individual”.
“His attack was stopped by two Essex police constables who
apprehended this dangerous man, whilst he was still armed
with the knife he had used to kill Sir David,” Jukes said.
Amess’s family said there was “no elation” on their part
following the sentencing. “Our amazing husband and father has
been taken from us in an appalling and violent manner,” they
said. “Nothing will ever compensate for that.”

Apr 13, 08:05

Eleni Varvitsioti in Athens

Greece to lift coronavirus restrictions for
summer months

Falaserna beach in Crete, which is one of the Greek islands preparing to welcome tourists this summer ©
Louisa Gouliamaki/AFP via Getty Images

Greece will lift coronavirus-related restrictions from the
beginning of May as the country prepares to open its doors for
summer tourists.
Health minister Thanos Plevris said on Wednesday that
between May 1 and August 31 there would be no need to
present proof of vaccination or negative Covid-19 tests to enter
restaurants and other establishments. The requirement to wear
masks indoors will be scrapped from June 1.
“The decision was based on the epidemiological data and
suggestions from experts,” Plevris said. The decision would be
re-evaluated at the beginning of September, the minister added.

The rule update means that local students can return to class
without having to test negative after the end of Easter holidays.

Apr 13, 07:31

Harriet Agnew in London

BlackRock profits climb as inflows prove
resilient
BlackRock has recorded better than expected first-quarter
profits as inflows from investors held up in the face of market
turmoil triggered by a technology sell-off and Russia’s invasion
of Ukraine.
The world’s largest money manager said on Wednesday that
adjusted net income hit $1.46bn in the first three months of the
year, up 18 per cent from a year ago and ahead of analysts’
forecast of $1.35bn.
The group has received “positive flows across all product types,
investment styles and regions”, said Larry Fink, chair and chief
executive.
Inflows proved resilient in a quarter in which stocks and bonds
fell in tandem, leaving few havens for investors grappling with
accelerating inflation and the turmoil Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine unleashed in commodity markets.

BlackRock generated $114bn of net inflows in the quarter,
surpassing analysts’ forecast of $96bn. This was led by net
inflows of $56bn to its iShares exchange traded funds that track
an index, and $20bn into its active business, which includes
alternatives strategies that are investors are increasingly
turning to.
However, assets under management dipped to $9.6tn in the
quarter, below the record $10tn it crossed for the first time at
the end of 2021.
BlackRock cited “the military conflict between Russia and
Ukraine” as a risk factor in the footnotes to the results, but
there was no other mention of the war in its 15-page earnings
statement.

Apr 13, 07:28

Jasmine Cameron-Chileshe in London

UK slaps travel bans and asset freezes on
dozens of Putin allies

Viktor Medvedchuk, pictured after his arrest by Ukrainian forces, has been hit with UK sanctions ©
Ukrainian Presidential Press Office via AP

The UK has imposed sanctions on a further 178 people linked to
President Vladimir Putin’s regime, in a move co-ordinated with
the EU.
The government on Wednesday hit the individuals, who are
linked to the unrecognised pro-Russian separatist regions
within Ukraine, with travel bans and asset freezes. The list
includes Alexander Ananchenko and Sergey Kozlov, self-styled
leaders of the breakaway regions of Donetsk and Luhansk.
In addition, the UK government has sanctioned six oligarchs
and associates of Putin alongside 22 individuals through the
urgent procedure.

Those affected include Viktor Medvedchuk, a pro-Russian
figure in Ukraine close to Russia’s president. Ukraine on
Tuesday announced it had arrested Medvedchuk, who had been
on the run. The UK has also taken steps against Maria Lavrova,
wife of foreign minister Sergei Lavrov, and Vladimir Yakunin, a
former head of Russian Railways and a long-term Putin
associate.
“In the wake of horrific rocket attacks on civilians in eastern
Ukraine, we are today sanctioning those who prop up the illegal
breakaway regions and are complicit in atrocities against the
Ukrainian people,” UK foreign secretary Liz Truss said on
Wednesday. “We will continue to target all those who aid and
abet Putin’s war.”
She added: “From tomorrow, we are banning the import of
Russian iron and steel, as well as the export of quantum
technologies and advanced materials that Putin sorely needs.”

Apr 13, 07:25

Joshua Franklin in New York

JPMorgan earnings hit as Ukraine war slows
dealmaking
JPMorgan Chase reported a 42 per cent year-on-year drop in
profit in the first quarter as dealmaking slowed and the bank
put aside almost $1bn in loan-loss reserves amid rising inflation
and the war in Ukraine.

The largest US bank by assets kicked off earnings season on
Wednesday by reporting net income of $8.28bn, or $2.63 per
share, for the first three months of 2022. That was down from
$14.3bn, or $4.50 per share in the same period last year.
The result fell short of analysts’ estimates for net income of
$8.54bn, or $2.72 per share, according to consensus data
compiled by Bloomberg.
“We remain optimistic on the economy, at least for the short
term – consumer and business balance sheets as well as
consumer spending remain at healthy levels – but see
significant geopolitical and economic challenges ahead due to
high inflation, supply chain issues and the war in Ukraine,” said
Jamie Dimon, JPMorgan chief executive.
JPMorgan’s investment banking revenue was down 31 per cent
year on year in the first quarter, at $2.05bn, compared with
analysts’ estimates for $2.2bn, as global dealmaking fell to the
lowest level since the start of the coronavirus pandemic.
The bank’s profit was also hit by a net credit reserve build of
$902mn, whereas in the same quarter last year JPMorgan
released $5.2bn of reserves it had previously set aside.
JPMorgan reported managed revenues – a measure closely
tracked by analysts – of $31.6bn for the quarter, down from
$33.1bn a year earlier and slightly ahead of forecasts for
$31.4bn.

JPMorgan, an industry bellwether, kicked off US bank earnings
season, with Citigroup, Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley and
Wells Fargo due to report results on Thursday. Bank of America
reports earnings on April 18.

Apr 13, 07:15

Nastassia Astrasheuskaya in Riga

Russia to divert energy exports to
alternative markets, says Putin
Russia will find alternative markets for its energy while Europe
and the US suffer the consequences of the crisis they created,
President Vladimir Putin has said.
“The refusal of a number of western countries to co-operate . . .
has already hit millions of Europeans,” the Russian leader said
on Wednesday. “It provoked a real energy crisis,” Putin said.
The US has been affected too, he told a gathering about Arctic
development.
“Of course, we also face problems, but alternative opportunities
open up for us,” he said.
He said Russia would send its energy resources to other
markets where they are “really needed” and boost its domestic
consumption to counter the impact of any lost demand.

The US has banned oil imports from Russia as part of stiff
sanctions set in retaliation for the invasion of Ukraine. The EU
has restricted coal imports and it has been mulling a limit on oil
and gas purchases, even though the bloc depends on these.
Asia, including Japan, South Korea and Taiwan, have followed
suit and pledged to wind down Russian coal imports.
Sanctions have hit production. Western energy companies have
pulled out of Russian oil and gas projects, while Europe has
banned the transfer of equipment for the liquefaction of natural
gas to Russia.
Europe has been the biggest market for Russian natural gas but
most of its LNG is contracted to Asia, with the top oil exporter
to China. The US has warned China and India not to step up
their purchases of Russian energy.

Apr 13, 07:06

Henry Foy in Brussels

Finland to decide whether to join Nato
‘within weeks’
Finland will make a decision on whether to apply to join Nato
within “weeks”, its prime minister has said, as the country’s
parliament prepares to debate the step.

The government has set out a document assessing the change in
Finland’s security environment resulting from Russia’s invasion
of Ukraine. Polling has shown a large majority of Finns believe
Helsinki should apply to join the military alliance.
The document will be presented to parliament on Wednesday,
with debates to start next week. Nato officials have signalled
that Finland and neighbouring Sweden would be welcomed into
the 30-member alliance if they applied.
“There are different perspectives to apply [for] Nato
membership or not to apply and we have to analyse these very
carefully,” prime minister Sanna Marin told reporters on
Wednesday. “But I think our process will be quite fast; it will
happen in weeks.”
Finland, which shares a long border with Russia, has previously
chosen to remain outside Nato but has deepened its formal
cooperation with the alliance in recent years.
Speaking at a joint press conference with her Swedish
counterpart, Marin said it would make sense for Finland and
Sweden to join the alliance together.
“If you ask me, I would prefer if we made similar choices for the
whole region, but it is up to Sweden to decide,” she said.
Swedish prime minister Magdalena Andersson said: “We have
to really think through what is really best for Sweden and our
security and peace in this situation.”

“We need to have a process to think this through,” she added,
cautioning against rushing into a decision.

Apr 13, 06:58

John Reed in Bucha

Bucha mass grave reveals ‘war crimes’, say
Ukrainian officials

Bodies are exhumed from a mass grave the grounds of a church in Bucha on Wednesday. The town’s main
prosecutor said the deceased were ‘just regular civilians’ © Sergei Supinsky/AFP via Getty Images

Ukrainian authorities on Wednesday began exhuming dozens
of bodies from a mass grave in Bucha near the capital Kyiv, as
they worked to gather evidence of what one local official called
“war crimes” committed by Russian troops who occupied the
area for about a month.

Bucha’s main prosecutor Ruslan Kravchenko said the grave,
near the city’s Church of St. Andrew and Pyervozvannoho All
Saints, was dug on April 8 and contained at least 57 bodies that
showed signs of having been killed in Russian artillery strikes
or from gunshot wounds.
The people found in the grave were all civilians, apart from one
policeman, Kravchenko said. Some had broken bones or their
hands or feet bound, he added. As work continued to exhume
the bodies, Krachenko said, the grave might be found to contain
as many as 60 more people.
“We qualify these deaths as a war crime,” he said, describing
the victims as “regular civilians who were killed just because of
their nationality, because they were locals”.
Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelensky has accused Russia of
war crimes and “genocide” during its invasion. Russian
president Vladimir Putin has accused the Ukrainians of staging
a “fake” in Bucha.
Iryna Venediktova, Ukraine’s chief prosecutor, said on Tuesday
that French experts had arrived in the country to help
investigate alleged war crimes, including experts in forensics,
ballistics, DNA, and fingerprinting, as well as crime scene
inspectors, explosives technicians, and investigators’ assistants.
There is currently no means of independently verifying
Ukrainian officials’ claims about Russia’s behaviour.

Apr 13, 06:53

Steff Chávez in Chicago

Ticket sales surging despite inflation
concerns, says Delta chief

Delta said it expected a ‘solid’ profit for the second quarter of 2022, thanks to a rise in consumer demand ©
Charlie Riedel/AP

Delta Air Lines’ chief executive said the carrier has sold a record
number of tickets in the past five weeks as customers set aside
their concerns about inflation to splurge on air travel.
“We’ve . . . sold more tickets, in that time, than any period in
public history,” Ed Bastian told the Financial Times in an
interview. “We’re seeing no signs of any customer reticence
around inflation” or health concerns.
The Atlanta-based carrier remains bullish on demand despite
rising fuel costs because it is “successfully recapturing” the
higher prices, Bastian said.

The average fare for US airlines’ domestic tickets purchased one
week from the date of travel was $214 on April 4, up 4.3 per
cent over the previous week, according to Raymond James
analysts.
Delta, the third-largest airline in the US, on Wednesday
reported an adjusted net loss of $784mn for the first quarter of
2022, or $1.23 per share. The loss was better than expected
because of a profitable March.
With consumer demand accelerating, the company said it
expected a “solid” profit for the second quarter, with a 12-14 per
cent operating margin and a “meaningful” full-year profit.
Adjusted first-quarter operating revenue of $8.2bn was 21 per
cent lower than in the same period in 2019. The carrier expects
revenue to reach near its pre-pandemic level in the second
quarter, with premium seats leading the recovery.
Read more on Delta here.

Apr 13, 06:31

Roman Olearchyk in Kyiv

Zelensky blames Russia for ‘thousands’ of
Ukrainian deaths in address to Estonia’s
parliament
Ukraine’s president has blamed the deaths of thousands in his
country on Russia’s sense of impunity and the international
community’s failure to deter the invasion.
“Tens of thousands of people have already been killed in
Ukrainian cities affected by Russian strikes,” said Volodymyr
Zelensky in an address to the Estonian parliament on
Wednesday.
He claimed Russia’s invading army had used “all kinds of
artillery, all kinds of missiles and air bombs against residential
areas and civilian infrastructure”. He said those included
“phosphorus bombs and other munitions prohibited by
international law”.
Zelensky’s address is the latest in a series he has delivered by
video link to parliamentarians around the world since Russia
launched its invasion on February 24.
He added: “This is an obvious terror against the civilian
population. It is an attempt to break the spirit of the people, to
subdue Ukrainians for generations or simply to destroy them.”
Zelensky’s comments echoed US president Joe Biden’s claim
hours earlier that Russia’s actions amounted to a “genocide”.

Zelensky called upon Estonia and other countries to form joint
investigative groups with Ukraine to investigate scores of
alleged war crimes.
“There is no crime that Russian soldiers have not committed in
49 days of this invasion,” he said.
There is no independent means to assess either side’s claims
about the death toll or other aspects of the war.

Apr 13, 06:23

Alexandra White in New York

What to watch in the Americas today
JPMorgan will head up Wednesday’s earnings and is likely to
reflect an expected hit to financial services groups and
investment banking in particular. Analysts predict the effects of
government stimulus measures and strong markets, which
supported a rise in M&A activities and stock exchange listings
during the coronavirus pandemic, are on the wane.

JPMorgan: The bank will report a 9 per cent slide in firstquarter revenue to about $30.9bn, compared with the same
period a year ago, a Reuters poll of analysts shows. Financial
services could still benefit from higher interest rates, which
would improve loan growth. JPMorgan investors will monitor
any costs associated with the bank’s move last month to end its
business in Russia in the wake of the invasion of Ukraine. A
Reuters poll forecasts earnings of $2.69 a share, compared with
$4.59 a year ago.
Other US earnings: Atlanta-based carrier Delta Air Lines,
asset manager BlackRock, and home goods retailer Bed Bath &
Beyond are to report today before the bell. Luxury secondhand
fashion retailer Rent the Runway is reporting earnings after the
bell.
PPI: The US producer price index, which tracks the prices that
businesses receive for their goods, is forecast to have risen 1.1
per cent in March from February. Last month’s annual increase
is expected to rise to 10.6 per cent from 10 per cent in February.
US consumer price growth hit 8.5 per cent in March, compared
with a year ago, the fastest pace since 1981.
Bank of Canada: Canada’s central bank is expected to raise
its benchmark interest rate by 0.5 percentage points to 1 per
cent in April, according to economists polled by Refinitiv. Some
economists have argued the Canadian economy is strong
enough to sustain this increase because the unemployment rate
fell to its lowest level on record in March, evidence of a strong
labour market.

Apr 13, 05:35

Roman Olearchyk in Kyiv

Russian invasion kills 191 children, say
Ukrainian prosecutors
Almost 200 children have been killed since Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine on February 24, Ukraine’s prosecutor-general has said.
The prosecutor’s office gave the figures on Wednesday in a
statement on Telegram, the messaging service.
“More than 540 children were injured in Ukraine as a result of
the armed aggression of the Russian Federation . . . 191 children
died and more than 349 received injuries of varying severity,”
the office said.
The figures do not include the scores of fatalities and injuries
among children during the eight-year proxy separatist war in
Ukraine’s eastern Donbas region that started in 2014 following
Russia’s invasion and annexation of Ukraine’s Crimea
peninsula. That conflict claimed some 14,000 lives before
Russia invaded Ukraine on February 24.
Prosecutors stressed that the data on child fatalities were not
final as work was under way to establish the number of
fatalities and casualties in “places of active hostilities, in the
temporarily occupied and liberated territories”.

The statement added: “Massive bombings and shelling by the
Russian armed forces of Ukrainian cities and villages have
damaged 957 educational institutions, of which 88 were
destroyed.”
There is no independent means of checking either side’s claims
about deaths or injuries in the war.
The figures were released hours after US president Joe Biden
described Russia’s invasion of Ukraine as a “genocide”. He cited
mass killings of civilians and shelling of residential buildings,
adding that it had become clear that Russia’s president
Vladimir Putin was “trying to wipe out the idea of even
being . . . Ukrainian”.

Apr 13, 04:55

Hudson Lockett in Hong Kong

Yen falls to 20-year low as Bank of Japan
holds fast to stimulus pledge
The yen fell to a 20-year low against the dollar as the Bank of
Japan’s ultra-loose monetary policy piled pressure on the
Japanese currency at a time when US policymakers at the
Federal Reserve are signalling their intent to raise interest
rates.

The fall of about 0.5 per cent on Wednesday pushed the yen
past ¥126 to the dollar, taking the currency almost 9 per cent
lower for the year to date.
The BoJ’s pledge to continue stimulus measures in order to
bolster Japan’s economy contrasts sharply with the global
consensus among central banks, particularly the Fed, where
policymakers are expected to raise interest rates this year to
rein in surging inflation.
That policy divergence has widened the gap between yields on
Japanese and US government bonds as the BoJ anchors the
former near zero, weakening demand for the yen and
prompting global investors to dump Japanese securities.
Japan’s finance minister Shunichi Suzuki told reporters on
Wednesday that rapid moves in the yen were “very
problematic”, warning that the government was watching
currency moves closely.
The yield differential between 10-year Japanese government
bonds and similar US Treasuries stood on Wednesday at about
2.5 percentage points, marking the widest margin since mid2019.

Apr 13, 04:50

William Langley in Hong Kong

Chinese imports decline as Covid hits
demand
Chinese imports unexpectedly fell in March because Covid-19
lockdowns disrupted demand in the world’s second-biggest
economy, upsetting forecasts from economists.
Total imports for the month came in at $228.7bn, 0.1 per cent
lower than during the same period a year earlier, according to
Chinese customs data. Economists polled by Bloomberg
forecasted an 8.4 per cent increase.

Growth in exports also slowed from 16.3 per cent year on year
in February to 14.7 per cent in March.
China is battling its most widespread outbreak of the
coronavirus yet, with a series of full or partial lockdowns
affecting as many as 45 cities and hundreds of millions of
people, Nomura analyst estimated.
Julian Evans-Pritchard, senior China economist at Capital
Economics, a slowdown in China’s property and export sectors
reduced demand for materials.
He added that slowing export growth pointed to flagging
demand in many of China’s main overseas markets as well as
Covid-induced manpower shortages in the logistics sector.

Apr 13, 04:42

Roman Olearchyk in Kyiv

Zelensky offers to swap pro-Russian
politician Medvedchuk for Ukrainian
troops
Ukraine’s president has offered to exchange Viktor
Medvedchuk, a pro-Russian politician and confidant of
Vladimir Putin, for Ukrainian troops captured by Russia’s
invading army.

Volodymyr Zelensky made the offer in a video address early on
Wednesday, hours after he announced in a social media post
that Medvedchuk had been detained by security services after
having escaped house arrest soon after Russia’s invasion.
“I suggest the Russian Federation to exchange this guy of yours
for our boys and girls who are now in Russian captivity,”
Zelensky said.
Zelensky’s offer came hours before Russian defence ministry
officials were quoted by the TASS news agency announcing the
surrender of more than 1,000 Ukrainian marines in the
besieged port city of Mariupol.
Russian and Ukrainian military claims cannot be independently
verified.
Medvedchuk, a personal friend of Putin who has said Russia’s
president is godfather to one of his children, was arrested last
year on treason charges, including divulging military secrets to
Moscow. He denied the charges.
Ukraine’s SBU state security services late on Tuesday said
Medvedchuk had been detained and showed photographs of
him in Ukrainian army camouflage, wearing handcuffs.
Zelensky on Wednesday said including Medvedchuk in a
prisoner exchange was justified. “If Medvedchuk chose a
military uniform for himself, he falls under the rules war,” he
said.

Apr 13, 04:30

Martin Arnold in Frankfurt

EU ban on Russian energy would spark
major recession in Germany, says economic
institute
A full EU embargo on Russian energy would trigger a major
recession in Germany, according to the country’s top economic
institute, which predicted the loss of hundreds of thousands of
jobs in the event of a ban.
“If gas supplies were to be cut off, the German economy would
undergo a sharp recession,” said Stefan Kooths, vice-president
of the Kiel Institute for the World Economy.
The think-tank said a full ban would choke the country’s
economy, sending output down 2.2 per cent next year and
wiping out over 400,000 jobs.
The new forecast released on Wednesday is more pessimistic
than most earlier economic studies and could give political
cover for chancellor Olaf Scholz’s government to push back
against calls for an immediate ban on Russian oil and gas
imports. Germany is heavily reliant on Russian energy.

The EU last week agreed to ban coal imports from Russia from
August. Some EU countries have called for the bloc to go
further by banning oil and gas imports, but Berlin has resisted
this, arguing it would be too economically damaging.
Five of Germany’s top economic research institutes predicted
that if all energy supplies from Russia were cut off, growth in
Europe’s largest economy would slow sharply from 2.9 per cent
last year to 1.9 per cent this year, before shrinking 2.2 per cent
in 2023.
That would be one of the biggest recessions in German history.
A survey by the Allensbach Institute published on Wednesday
found 30 per cent of Germans expressed support for an
immediate ban on all Russian energy imports.

Apr 13, 04:07

Neil Hume in London

International Energy Agency lowers
forecast for global oil demand
The International Energy Agency has lowered its forecast for
global oil demand because of surging Covid cases in China and
weaker than expected demand in the US and other developed
countries.

The West’s energy watchdog now expects demand to average
99.4mn barrels a day this year, down from its previous estimate
of 99.7mn b/d in March.
“The stringent lockdowns in China have led us to further revise
down our estimate for oil demand in the second quarters and
for the year as a whole,” the Paris-based group said in its
monthly oil market report.
“In addition, more complete demand data for the first quarter
of 2022, especially in the US, was sharply lower than
preliminary estimates.”
The oil market has been volatile since Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine, with prices affected by concerns about falling supplies
from Russia and huge stock releases by large energy-consuming
nations, including the US.
Last month the price hit almost $140 as the market tried to
assess the impact of war on Russia’s vast oil industry. It then
pulled back as the US and other IEA member countries
announced plans to release 240mn barrels from their strategic
reserves over the next six months.
On Monday, Brent crude fell below $100 a barrel but then
rebounded and was trading at $104 on Wednesday.
The IEA expects Russian oil supply to fall by 1.5mn b/d in April
and believes that up to 3mn b/d could be offline from May due
to “international sanctions and as the impact of a widening
customer-driven embargo comes into full force.”

Apr 13, 03:59

Jim Pickard in London

UK government to raise £3bn from
developers to fix building defects

A construction worker inspects cladding © Hollie Adams/Bloomberg

The British government is set to raise £3bn from a new tax on
the building industry over 10 years designed to fix defects
highlighted by the Grenfell scandal.
Michael Gove, the levelling-up secretary, announced on
Wednesday morning that the new “Building Safety Levy” would
raise £3bn over the next decade, far higher than internal
Whitehall estimates of £500mn.

That extra money, which will be charged on each new
development that seeks building control approval, will go
towards replacing potentially dangerous cladding on thousands
of buildings.
At the same time 35 developers have pledge to spend £2bn to
fix their own buildings erected over the last 30 years, doubling
their existing commitment of £1bn.
Those signing up include England’s biggest builders, such as
Barratt Developments, Persimmon, Berkeley Group, Bellway,
Taylor Wimpey and Redrow.
Gove, who took up his job last autumn, has made it a priority to
force the industry to provide the cash to fix all buildings over 11
metres high which could be unsafe.
He had threatened to freeze developers that refuse to sign out
of the planning system and government housing funds.
But given that the minister asked 53 companies to come
forward with financial contributions that means that 18 have
refused to do so.
Gove warned there was “little time left” for the companies yet to
make a pledge to fund remedies to their own buildings. “Those
who continue to refuse will face consequences if they fail to do
so.”

Apr 13, 03:57

Robert Wright in London

Setback for P&O after inspectors detain
second ship
P&O Ferries has suffered a setback to its efforts to return to full
operations after maritime inspectors detained the Spirit of
Britain, the second of two ferries on its Dover to Calais route.
The UK’s Maritime and Coastguard Agency (MCGA) said the
vessel had been detained because surveyors identified “a
number of deficiencies” which were grounds for detention.
Inspectors legally barred the ship from sailing.
The operator will need to address the issues before inviting the
agency to make a second inspection of the ship.
This will come as heavy blow to P&O, which said last week that
it hoped to restart operations on the popular crossing.
Another ferry on the route, Pride of Kent, was detained on
March 29 after an MCGA inspection and has not yet been
cleared to return to operations.
The detention will extend the period of constrained capacity
between Dover and Calais, which has led to long delays for
truck drivers crossing into Europe.
The MCGA did not detail what faults inspectors had found on
the vessel. But it said it had advised P&O to invite it back once
it had addressed the issues identified during the inspection.
“We do not know yet when this will be,” the agency said.

P&O’s operations have been severely constrained since it
announced on March 17 that it was dismissing all its existing
staff and replacing them with lower-paid agency workers.

Apr 13, 03:38

Leke Oso Alabi in London

Boris Johnson ‘completely mortified’
following partygate fine, says UK minister
The UK’s transport secretary has said the prime minister is
“completely mortified” after the Metropolitan Police issued him
with a fine for attending a social gathering during the country’s
coronavirus-induced lockdown.
“The one thing I know — and I spoke to the prime minister — is
he’s completely mortified,” Grant Shapps told Sky News on
Wednesday.
Police fined Johnson on Tuesday for attending a birthday party
held at Number 10 Downing Street during a Covid-19
lockdown.
Schapps said on the day of the party the prime minister had
visited a school and when he arrived back to Downing Street
“by surprise some of his team had arranged to wish him a
happy birthday”.

“It shouldn’t have happened, he’s paid the £50 fine [and] that’s
the right thing to do,” he said, adding that Johnson attended
eight separate meetings prior to the birthday gathering.
However, opposition parties and some conservatives have
called for Johnson’s resignation.
“[Johnson] has apologised, and he’s accepted responsibility,
and he’s reformed Number 10, and he’s getting on with doing
the job,” said Shapps.

Apr 13, 02:50

Neil Hume in London

Gold producer Polymetal postpones
dividend vote as sanctions bite
Russian gold producer Polymetal has postponed a vote on
planned $246mn dividend payment because of a liquidity
crunch brought about by the sanctions imposed on Moscow.
The London-listed miner was due to put the payout to a vote at
its annual meeting this month but it has scrapped that vote and
will decide in August whether it is prudent to return cash to
shareholders.

Polymetal, which is 24 per cent owned by Russian businessman
Alexander Nesis, cited several reasons for its decision including
“mounting uncertainty with availability of funds due to
sanctions on Russian banks and economy” and “higher working
capital needs as a result of liquidity crunch.”
The company also said it was facing a “significantly higher cost
of funding” with Russian interest rates at 17 per cent.
Polymetal’s chair Riccardo Orcel said the company’s
reconstituted board had re-evaluated the decision made at the
time of annual results in March to pay a final dividend and had
“unanimously” come to the conclusion “that the payment
decision should be postponed in order to sustain the stability
and liquidity of the business.”
“We will continue to monitor the operating, funding and
regulatory conditions in which the business operates, hoping
that stability is restored, improving visibility which would allow
us to return to our cash distribution policy,” he said. The
company will also decide in August whether to pay an interim
dividend for the first six months of 2022.
Shares in Polymetal have slumped since the war in Ukraine
started but have rallied in recent weeks after the company said
it was considering spinning off its assets in Kazakhstan.
However, they are still down 75 per cent, valuing the company,
once a member of the FTSE 100, at just £1.26bn.

Apr 13, 02:38

Hannah Kuchler in London

£1.5bn GSK acquisition bolsters blood
cancer expertise
GlaxoSmithKline has reached an agreement to acquire Sierra
Oncology for £1.5bn, as the UK drugmaker seeks to bolster its
cancer treatment business ahead of a spin-off of its consumer
health division this summer.
Nasdaq-listed Sierra Oncology is preparing to submit its
Momelotinib drug for regulatory approval later this year, after a
successful phase three trial reported results in January.
Momelotinib is designed to treat patients with myelofibrosis, a
rare form of bone marrow cancer, while also improving the
symptoms of their anaemia. The red blood cell deficiency
affects a high proportion of myelofibrosis patients and is the
primary reason why patients discontinue treatment.
Luke Miels, GSK’s chief commercial officer, said the acquisition
complimented the company’s commercial and medical
expertise in blood cancers.
“With this proposed acquisition, we have the opportunity to
potentially bring meaningful new benefits to patients and
further strengthen our portfolio of specialty medicines,” he
said.

GSK expects Sierra to start contributing to sales in 2023, with
“significant growth potential” after. It anticipates it will be
accretive to adjusted earnings per share from 2024.
Sierra shareholders will receive $55 a share, a premium of
about 39 per cent to its closing stock price on Tuesday and a 63
per cent premium to its volume-weighted average price over the
last 30 trading days. The deal is expected to close before or in
the third quarter.

Apr 13, 02:36

Jonathan Eley in London

Tesco to buy back £750mn of shares but
cautions on outlook

© AFP via Getty Images

Tesco reported annual profit in line with analysts’ forecasts and
said it would buy back another £750mn of its shares, but
cautioned that the squeeze on household incomes meant the
outlook for the current year was more uncertain than usual.
“Clearly, the external environment has become more
challenging in recent months,” said chief executive Ken
Murphy. “Against a tough backdrop for our customers and with
household budgets under pressure, we are laser-focused on
keeping the cost of the weekly shop in check,” he added.
The UK’s largest supermarket expects retail operating profit for
the year to February 2023 to be between £2.4bn and £2.6bn,
depending on customer shopping habits, cost inflation, and the
extent to which rising costs are absorbed or passed on.
For the year to February 26 2022 retail operating profit was
£2.65bn, in line with forecasts and up 35 per cent on the
previous year as pandemic-related costs fell away and shopping
habits reverted to pre-Covid norms.
The group’s banking unit generated a £176mn profit and is
expected to make between £120mn and £160mn this year.
Tesco has bought back around £300mn of shares since last
October, and on Wednesday committed to buying a further
£750mn back over the next 12 months.
The company also declared a total dividend of 10.9p per share,
up 19 per cent from last year and the highest payout since 2014
if special dividends are excluded.

Apr 13, 02:23

Valentina Romei in London

UK inflation hits 7% as fuel prices surge
UK inflation rose to 7 per cent, hitting a fresh 30-year high after
fuel prices surged and raising pressure on the Bank of England
to increase interest rates again.
Consumer prices increased at an annual rate of 7 per cent last
month, up from 6.2 per cent in February and well above the 0.7
per cent recorded in March 2021, according to data published
by the Office for National Statistics on Wednesday.
The reading was above the 6.7 per cent forecast by economists
polled by Reuters, and the highest level since March 1992, when
it reached 7.1 per cent.

Inflation in March was more than three times the Bank of
England’s target of 2 per cent, and higher than the rate of
“around 6 per cent” that it forecast at its last meeting. The BoE
said it expected inflation to climb to 8 per cent in April and
possibly to rise further in the autumn following the increase in
energy price cap set by the regulator.
For more on global inflation, see the FT’s inflation tracker here.

Apr 13, 01:26

Leke Oso Alabi in London

What to watch in Europe today
Inflation: The UK releases March consumer price index data
and retail price index figures. Surging energy prices helped
push UK consumer price inflation to a 30-year high of 6.2 per
cent in February, more than three times the Bank of England’s
2 per cent target.
Economic news: The European Union and Italy publish
industrial production data.
Results: Tesco will publish its first half results on Wednesday.
The UK’s largest supermarket chain reported strong trading at
the end of 2021. However, the supermarket said in February it
would axe more than 1,000 jobs as it sought to contain rapidly
rising labour costs.
Markets: Futures for the Euro Stoxx 50 and the FTSE 100
were up 0.3 per cent and 0.1 per cent, respectively.

Apr 12, 23:50

Christian Davies in Seoul

South Korea halts phaseout of nuclear
energy

Outgoing president Moon Jae-in had planned to reduce the number of active nuclear reactors in South
Korea to 17 by 2034 © Bloomberg

Officials representing South Korea’s conservative presidentelect have announced a shift in the country’s energy policy,
halting a gradual nuclear phaseout plan criticised for
intensifying the east Asian country’s dependence on fossil fuels.
Won Hee-ryong, policy chief on president-elect Yoon Suk-yeol’s
transition committee, said that outgoing president Moon Jaein’s push to reduce nuclear’s share of the Korean energy mix
had increased greenhouse gas emissions and threatened to
push up energy bills.

“Carbon neutrality, which the country already promised to the
international community, is a path for us to take,” Won told
reporters. “But our climate-energy team’s tentative conclusion
is that the Yoon administration needs to set new plans that are
honest, realistic and responsible regarding carbon neutrality.”
Under President Moon’s nuclear phaseout plan, construction
on new plants was to be suspended while older plants were to
be retired, with the aim of reducing the number of operational
reactors to 17 by 2034.
According to the International Energy Agency, coal accounted
for 42 per cent and natural gas 25 per cent of South Korea’s
energy mix in 2019. A review conducted by environmental
think-tank Ember found that solar and wind power accounted
for just 4.7 per cent of the country’s electricity generation in
2021, less than half the global average.
Concerns have also been raised about South Korea’s reliance on
Russian fossil fuels — over 20 per cent of the country’s coal
imports came from Russia in 2020, according to Ember data.
Last week, an official at Korea Western Power told the Financial
Times that the company had not made any additional
purchases of Russian coal since Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.

Apr 12, 23:33

James Fernyhough in Melbourne

New Zealand raises interest rates ahead of
expectations
The Reserve Bank of New Zealand has lifted its official interest
rate to 1.5 per cent in response to rising inflation, in a 50 basis
point increase that came earlier than previously flagged.
The decision came as the US recorded inflation of 8.5 per cent,
its fastest in 40 years, and the US Federal Reserve warned
further consumer price increases were likely.
Consumer prices have risen globally as supply chains failed to
keep up with a post-lockdown surge in demand, while Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine further pushed up commodity prices, in
many cases to record levels.
The RBNZ monetary policy committee last met on February 23,
the day before Russia invaded Ukraine, when it lifted rates by
25 basis points and flagged further tightening throughout 2022.
The committee said it had brought forward this tightening in
response to “rising inflation expectations”. The country’s most
recent inflation figure, from December 2021, was 5.9 per cent,
up from 1.1 per cent a year earlier.
“The level of global economic activity continues to generate
rising inflation pressures, exacerbated by ongoing supply
disruptions in large part driven by COVID-19,” the monetary
policy committee said in a statement.

Apr 12, 20:47

William Langley in Hong Kong

What to watch in Asia today
New Zealand: Officials at the Reserve Bank of New Zealand
are expected to raise interest rates for a fourth straight meeting
as they seek to tame growing inflation.
China: The country releases figures for March exports, imports
and trade balance. China set a record for its annual trade
surplus in 2021, thanks to a sustained boom in exports during
the Covid-19 pandemic.
Markets: Australian equities rose 0.3 per cent in early trading,
while Japanese stocks edged 0.6 per cent higher. The moves
followed a turbulent day in the US, where Wall Street stocks
gave up earlier gains after a sharp rise in oil prices helped
reignite inflation concerns. The S&P 500 ended the day 0.3 per
cent lower and the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite also dipped
0.3 per cent.

Apr 12, 20:17

Joshua Chaffin and Sara Germano in New York

Police seek ‘person of interest’ in New York
subway shooting

Police say they are looking for a man who rented a U-Haul moving van in Philadelphia that they believe is
tied to the incident © Getty Images

New York police say they are seeking a “person of interest” in
connection with an attack on a Brooklyn subway train in which
10 commuters were shot and at least 13 more were injured.
James Essig, the New York Police Department’s chief of
detectives, on Tuesday evening described the shooter as a
heavyset black man of about 5-feet, 5-inches tall, who wore a
grey hooded sweatshirt and a neon high-visibility vest.
Essig said that police recovered a Glock 9mm handgun, several
undetonated smoke grenades and a hatchet from the scene, as
well as a key to a U-Haul moving van rented in Philadelphia
that they believe is tied to the incident.

Police identified the renter of that van, Frank R James, as a
“person of interest” in the case. They said James’s connection to
the shooting was still unclear. No suspect has yet been
identified or apprehended in connection with the shooting.
Keechant Sewell, New York police commissioner, said on
Tuesday evening that while five victims remained in critical
condition, none of the injuries were life-threatening. The
incident was not being investigated as a terrorist incident, she
added.
The attack occurred at about 8.24am, during the morning
commute, between the 25th Street and 36th Street stations in
the Sunset Park neighbourhood of Brooklyn. Police said the
shooter released two smoke grenades before opening fire on
passengers, firing “at least 33 times” into the second car of the
Manhattan-bound N train.
Read more about the New York subway shooting

Apr 12, 19:19

Lauren Fedor in Washington

Biden describes Putin’s actions in Ukraine
as ‘genocide’ for first time

Joe Biden speaks at biofuel company Poet Bioprocessing’s facility in Menlo, Iowa, on Tuesday © Bloomberg

US president Joe Biden referred to Vladimir Putin’s actions in
Ukraine as “genocide” for the first time, in an apparent
escalation in the White House’s rhetoric against Russia.
Speaking at an event in Iowa on Tuesday to promote his
administration’s efforts to cut the cost of petrol for US
consumers, Biden said: “Your family budget, your ability to fill
up your tank, none of it should hinge on whether a dictator
declares war and commits genocide half a world away.”
The comments marked a major shift for the US president, who
previously stopped short of calling atrocities in Bucha and
elsewhere “genocide”, instead accusing Putin of committing
“war crimes”.

White House national security adviser Jake Sullivan earlier this
month told reporters the US had “not yet seen a level of
systematic deprivation of life of the Ukrainian people to rise to
the level of genocide”.
Volodymyr Zelensky described Biden’s comments as the “true
words of a true leader”, in a tweet directed to the US president’s
Twitter handle.
“Calling things by their names is essential to stand up to evil,”
Ukraine’s president wrote in his message.

True words of a true leader @POTUS. Calling things by their names
is essential to stand up to evil. We are grateful for US assistance
provided so far and we urgently need more heavy weapons to
prevent further Russian atrocities.
— Volodymyr Zelenskyy / Володимир Зеленський
(@ZelenskyyUa) April 12, 2022

Biden later stood by the comments, telling reporters it had
become “clearer and clearer that Putin is just trying to wipe out
the idea of even being . . . Ukrainian”.
“The evidence is mounting . . . more evidence is coming out of
the, literally, the horrible things that the Russians have done in
Ukraine, and we are going to only learn more and more about
the devastation.
“We will let the lawyers decide internationally whether or not it
qualifies, but it sure seems that way to me.”

Apr 12, 19:17

Felicia Schwartz in New York

Pentagon to meet top arms makers to
discuss stepping up aid to Ukraine
The Pentagon will host a meeting of top arms makers on
Wednesday to discuss stepping up lethal aid to Ukraine, a US
defence official said, as Russian forces regroup for a renewed
assault on the east of the country.
America’s eight largest defence contractors, among them
Lockheed Martin, Raytheon and L3 Technologies, have been
invited to the classified meeting aimed at increasing assistance
to Ukraine and preparing for a protracted conflict, the official
said.
“We will discuss industry proposals to accelerate production of
existing systems and develop new, modernised capabilities
critical to the department’s ongoing security assistance to
Ukraine and long-term readiness of US and ally/partner
forces,” the defence official said.
The US has provided more than $1.7bn in security assistance to
Ukraine since Russia’s invasion of the country in February,
including more than 1,400 Stinger anti-aircraft missiles, 5,000
Javelin anti-tank missiles and hundreds of Switchblade drones,
according to the Pentagon.

The US has already delivered most of a recently pledged
$800mn defence package to Ukraine and expects to finish
supplying a $100mn package of Javelins by mid-April.
Pentagon officials say the Javelin and Stinger systems have
been particularly effective in Ukraine’s efforts to halt Russia’s
advances, since they are able to precisely target and destroy
enemy vehicles.
Raytheon and Lockheed Martin together produce the Javelin
and Raytheon makes the Stinger missile.
Read more on the arms makers’ meeting here

Apr 12, 19:17

George Steer in London and Joe Rennison in New York

US stocks end lower as oil price rise stokes
inflation concerns
Wall Street stocks gave up earlier gains after a sharp rise in oil
prices helped reignite inflation concerns, even after a crucial
element of US inflation data came out lower than expected.
The S&P 500 ended the day 0.3 per cent lower, having moved
as much as 1.3 per cent higher earlier on Tuesday. The techheavy Nasdaq Composite closed 0.3 per cent lower.

Oil prices surged by more than 6 per cent, undermining an
initially positive reaction to the latest US inflation data released
Tuesday morning.
Stripping out price changes for volatile items such as food and
energy left the “core” US consumer price index up 0.3 per cent
month on month, lower than the 0.5 per cent forecast from
economists polled by Reuters.
However, headline consumer prices rose 8.5 per cent year on
year in March, up from 7.9 per cent in February, said the
Bureau of Labor Statistics, marking the quickest annual rise
since 1981.
The lower core inflation reading initially brought a measure of
relief for investors, who feared an inflation overshoot would
heap pressure on the US Federal Reserve to tame price growth
by swiftly raising interest rates — the prospect of which has
unsettled global markets in recent months.
In government debt markets, the yield on the 10-year US
Treasury note, which underpins global borrowing costs,
dropped 0.06 percentage points to 2.72 per cent. The yield on
the two-year note, which closely tracks interest rate
expectations, fell further, indicating investors recalibrated their
expectations for interest rate rises following the data release.
Read more on the day’s market moves here

Apr 12, 19:16

FT Reporters

Ukraine war round-up: More than 400
found dead in Bucha
More than 400 civilians were found dead in Bucha, on the
outskirts of Kyiv, and the town’s mayor said the death toll is
expected to rise.
Kyiv urged Brussels to include a Russian energy embargo to EU
sanctions.
Meanwhile, US president Joe Biden and UK prime minister
Boris Johnson agreed to “ratchet up” economic pressure on
Vladimir Putin’s regime and “decisively” end western reliance
on Russian oil and gas.
Putin said peace talks with Ukraine were at a “dead end” and
claimed that Kyiv deviated from agreements struck in Turkey.
Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelensky revealed the
Ukrainian politician Viktor Medvedchuk, a pro-Russian
oligarch and close friend of Putin, had been detained after
fleeing house arrest.
German president Frank-Walter Steinmeier abandoned plans
to visit Kyiv and admitted he would not be welcome there,
following recent backlash over his closeness to Russia.
Economic developments:

Russia forecast economic output would shrink by 10 per
cent this year under the weight of international sanctions
Boeing cut almost 100 aeroplanes from its order count in
March because of the war in Ukraine.
US inflation hit 8.5 per cent in March, following a surge in
energy and food prices fuelled by Russia’s war on Ukraine
Greece plans to accelerate its oil and gas exploration in an
effort to reduce its dependence on Russian energy imports
The World Trade Organization cut its forecast for growth in
the global goods trade because of the war in Ukraine
In stock markets, Europe’s Stoxx 600 closed down 0.4 per
cent. The US benchmark S&P 500 and the Nasdaq
Composite both declined 0.3 per cent
Brent crude, the international benchmark, jumped back
above $100 a barrel on Tuesday, settling at $104.64 a barrel

Russian forces focus on eastern Ukraine
Key ground/naval attacks
Russian-claimed control
Assessed Russian advance
Nuclear power plant

Russian military presence
Ukrainian-claimed counter-offensive
Under Russian control
Populated areas

RUSSIA
Extent of territories
recognised by Russia

Kharkiv
Kharkiv

UKRAINE

LUHANSK

KHARKIV

UKRAINE
Dnipro
Dnipro

Zaporizhzhia
Zaporizhzhia

Izyum
Izyum
Severodonetsk
Severodonetsk
Kramatorsk
Kramatorsk
GION
E
R
S
Luhansk
Luhansk
A
DONB
DONETSK

Donetsk
Donetsk
Territory held by
Russia-backed
separatists

Mariupol
Mariupol

Melitopol
n

Berdyansk

100km

Source: Institute for the Study of War , AEI's Critical Threats Project, WorldPop, FT research • Updated
9am GMT Apr 9
* Crimea was annexed by Russia in 2014 but this is not recognised by the international community © FT

Military developments:

Skirmishes along the Donbas frontline and nearby regions
continued as Russia readied its larger assault
The US was watching a convoy of Russian vehicles heading
south towards Izium to prepare for fresh fighting
Alexander Dvornikov, who led armed forces in Syria, is
Russia’s new commander in Ukraine

Show more posts

