FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Unhedged

The FOMC and the luxury of dissent
Plus more on tariffs and price increases

ROBERT ARMSTRONG

© FT montage

Robert Armstrong and Hakyung Kim
Published JUL 31 2025

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
This article is an on-site version of our Unhedged newsletter. Premium subscribers can sign up
here to get the newsletter delivered every weekday. Standard subscribers can upgrade to
Premium here, or explore all FT newsletters

Good morning. The Mag 7 boom continues (if you ignore Tesla). Meta and Microsoft both beat
revenue expectations in the second quarter, and their shares rose 10 and 7 per cent, respectively, in
late trading. Meanwhile, Donald Trump has, er, backed off on copper tariffs: the threatened 50 per
cent tariff was only applied to semi-finished copper (pipes, wires and the like), not ores and
concentrates. US copper futures fell 20 per cent on the news. All of this on the same day as a GDP
announcement and a Fed meeting. More on those below. Email us: unhedged@ft.com

The Fed and GDP
The Fed governors Michelle Bowman and Christopher Waller think that the Fed should have cut
rates yesterday, rather than standing pat. It was the first time there have been two dissenting votes
in a Federal Open Market Committee meeting in more than 30 years.
Reading the second-quarter GDP report that landed a few hours before the committee’s decision
was announced, you might conclude the dissenters are right. Economic growth is slowing down.
The wild swings in imports and inventories make the headline growth number illegible, so
everyone is looking at final domestic sales instead. It has now decelerated for three straight
quarters:

The primary reason, as Fed chair Jay Powell pointed out yesterday, is lower consumer spending.
Though spending accelerated a touch from the first quarter to the second, the first half of this year
is clearly cooler than last year:

The cooling is not restricted to the consumer. While overall private investment looks a little
stronger in the past two quarters than in 2024, that is driven mostly by investment in equipment.
Commercial and residential building (green and light blue lines, below) are both contracting hard:

And the growth in equipment investment is driven mostly by information processing equipment,
with a little help from intellectual property purchases — that is, by the data centre boom. Absent
that, the investment cycle would be turning down.
Growth is not a target of Fed policy, employment is. As Powell pointed out several times yesterday,
the labour market seems to be operating at full employment, with an unemployment rate of 4.1 per
cent. While job creation is slowing, the workforce is also shrinking, leaving the two in balance.
But the dissenters can argue that the slowing growth is sending a signal that the stability of the job
market is under threat. What is more, PCE inflation is at 2.5 per cent, and part of that — one can
argue about how much — is due to tariff flow-through. Powell said he expected tariff price
increases to be a one-time effect. Given that, is it not best to stop quibbling about the 2.5 per cent
versus 2 per cent and start to ease policy?

In fact, no. Powell and the majority of the committee made the right call, for three reasons:

Services inflation (the green line, above). While the second quarter rate (2.9
per cent) was a bit lower, the trend is clearly sideways, not down.
Underlying inflation, even putting tariffs aside, is not beaten.
The amount of tariff inflation that penetrates to consumers is still a matter
of debate, and it is not certain that it will be a one-time effect, either. The
trend in durable goods inflation (pink line, above) is downright alarming.
It remains unclear whether the “slowdown” in the GDP data is not, in fact,
normalisation following the post-pandemic sugar high. Final domestic sales
are growing at 1.2 per cent. Is that so much lower than the US’s long-term
trend growth rate?

We have just recovered from a major, damaging inflationary incident, inflation is above target, and
unemployment is very low. To say that under those conditions the central bank should look at signs
of rising inflation and say “transitory” is a reach. Bowman and Waller have the luxury of dissent.
Their opinion was never going to matter to policy. If the labour market cracks later this year, they
look prescient and independent-minded. If, instead, inflation takes hold again, they will have done
no damage and be part of a group. The majority of the committee do not enjoy such asymmetrical
incentives.
(Armstrong)

Tariffs and prices: speak up
Last week, when the second-quarter earnings season was young, we noted some companies had
begun to raise the alarm on tariffs hitting their profits. We’re now at the halfway point of the
season, and the drumbeat continues.
Procter & Gamble forecasts a $1bn hit to pre-tax profits from tariffs in the 2026 fiscal year. It had
previously announced price rises in the mid-single-digits range on about a quarter of its products.
According to CFO Andre Schulten on the earnings call:

At these rates, tariffs alone are a 5 [percentage] point headwind to core
earnings per share growth in fiscal 2026. We will look for every opportunity
to mitigate these impacts, including sourcing flexibility, productivity
improvements, and pricing with innovation in affected categories and
markets.
“Pricing with innovation”? Come on. Schulten’s unwillingness to speak plainly about how much the
company will offset tariffs with higher prices is reminiscent of GM’s CFO Paul Jacobson last week:

We’re still tracking to offset at least 30 per cent of the $4bn to $5bn full-year
2025 tariff impact through strategic actions such as manufacturing
adjustments, targeted cost initiatives and consistent pricing.
“Consistent” with what? Meanwhile, toolmaker Stanley Black & Decker, which forecasts about
$800mn in tariff impacts, leading to “targeted” price increases said:

The organisation is remaining focused on executing our robust plan designed
to mitigate tariffs. We plan to leverage supply chain moves and targeted
pricing actions to improve our gross margin in the coming quarters.
Trump has lashed out at companies, most notably Walmart, that have been explicit about offsetting
tariffs with prices. But companies don’t work for the president; they work for shareholders and
have a duty of honesty to customers, too. Tariffs are a tax increase. Companies are in the best
position to help everyone understand who is going to pay it. Executives should stop being so mealymouthed.
(Kim)

One good read
Britain is OK.

FT Unhedged podcast
Can’t get enough of Unhedged? Listen to our
new podcast, for a 15-minute dive into the
latest markets news and financial headlines,
twice a week. Catch up on past editions of
the newsletter here.

Recommended newsletters for you
Due Diligence — Top stories from the world of corporate finance. Sign up here
The Lex Newsletter — Lex, our investment column, breaks down the week’s key themes, with
analysis by award-winning writers. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Robert Armstrong
Unhedged
Global Economy
US economy
US inflation

