FT PROFESSIONAL

Chris Giles on Central Banks Central banks

How central banks should navigate an uncertain 2026
Communicating better about what they don’t know would be a start

Research suggests fan charts are superior at communicating uncertainty and reducing the public’s feeling of betrayal when forecasts
turn out to be wrong © Henry Nicholls/AFP/Getty Images

Chris Giles
Published DEC 16 2025

This article is an on-site version of our Chris Giles on Central Banks newsletter. Premium
subscribers can sign up here to get the newsletter delivered every Tuesday. Standard
subscribers can upgrade to Premium here, or explore all FT newsletters

Surveys of public understanding about monetary policy tend to be dismal affairs. People are pretty
clueless about inflation, overestimating its level; they do not think in neat annual chunks of time;
they worry when prices rise above quite low thresholds; and they overestimate their knowledge.
Newer research shows they take credit for their wage rises, but blame others for a rising cost of
living. That greatly complicates the task of setting monetary policy.
This lack of understanding and increased suspicion have contributed to a sharp decline in public
satisfaction with the work done by the Bank of England, US Federal Reserve and other central
banks, as the chart below shows.
When faced with a highly uncertain outlook for 2026, central banks need some help in
understanding how best to get their message across (assuming, of course, that their policy is set
correctly).

Public satisfaction with the Bank of England and Federal Reserve is fragile
Net satisfaction with performance (%)
BoE

Fed

Satisfaction
60

40

20

A lovely piece of research currently being presented in universities and central banks seeks to help
out with that task. It asks: how best should central banks communicate uncertainty? It is being led
by professor Michael McMahon of Oxford university, alongside co-authors Matthew Naylor, Ryan
Rholes and Peter Rickards.
The first part of the research attempts to work out what visual presentation of forecasts members
of the public and an expert panel objectively understand best and like most.

The trial showed people six presentations of forecasts (shown below) and then asked them
objective questions about the data to test their understanding. The six alternatives tested point
forecasts, a fan chart, a point forecast with a range, a box and whiskers plot, a dot plot and a
(hateful) speedometer approach.
Both the public and experts preferred the point forecasts, although the fan charts and dot plots also
scored highly. The speedometer was a turkey in terms of what people said they liked and
understood.
When it came to objectively testing which one best conveyed uncertainty, obviously the point
forecast scored very poorly because it ignores that issue. Dots conveyed too much certainty. Fan
charts did best among the public and experts in striking the balance between being liked and
accurately highlighting uncertainty.

With these results to hand, the second question the research sought to address was how people
react when a central bank gets its forecast wrong, as we have seen quite a bit recently. Does the
presentation of a forecast alter the way people react to central bank forecast errors?

Here, the research tested point forecasts against a fan chart in a lab experiment in which people
were motivated with money to give genuine answers. They were given a time series of inflation data
extracted from a standard model of an economy and asked to give a forecast, knowing their payout
would depend partly on their accuracy. Then they were shown a “central bank forecast” and asked
whether they wanted to update their own prediction.
The researchers then showed them the real outcome for the first year, which came from a random
draw of possibilities from the model, and asked them for their updated predictions. Finally, they
were given a new central bank forecast on the basis of the outcome in the first period to see
whether they still trusted the central bank, especially if it had made a big error initially.
Here is a brief summary of the results:

People were overconfident in their own calibration of the uncertainty of
forecasts. This will surprise nobody, but it shows it is not just artificial
intelligence that bullshits when it does not know.
People anchor their forecasts on those produced by the central bank, so the
monetary authority has an important role in shaping expectations.
Point estimates in forecasts are better at anchoring expectations than fan
charts.
But when errors are revealed, people feel more betrayed if they had initially
been served with a point estimate rather than a fan — especially if the error
was large.
People are still willing to be influenced by a second central bank forecast,
whether it comes from a point estimate or a fan chart. This indicates that
the loss of central bank credibility is not that large in a lab setting.
McMahon concludes that the results of both estimates show the value of fan charts in
communicating uncertainty and reducing the feeling of betrayal when forecasts turn out to be
wrong.

But he told me that the lab setting might be skewing the final result, because participants were
forced to continue to engage. In real life, they might well just stop listening and go and do
something else.

Rejoice for Fed profitability
It is the time of year for cheer, so I can bring you the good news that the Fed is broadly profitable
again now that its interest rate has fallen.
The Fed pays interest on banks’ reserve balances at the midpoint of its fed funds target range,
which is currently 3.65 per cent. It holds mostly US Treasury bonds with variable yields.
When short-term interest rates were high, the Fed made a loss. But this loss has fallen as rates have
come down and quantitative tightening has reduced the overall balance sheet size.

The Fed is moving back into profit as interest rates have fallen
Fed funds rate

Weekly remittance to US Treasury

Weekly profit at the Fed ($mn)

2000

0

Because the US likes to brush these losses under a huge carpet in the Fed’s Eccles building rather
than recognise them in government accounts, they accumulate as a “deferred asset” of about
$240bn on the central bank’s balance sheet. In reality, these are future remittances of profits to the
US Treasury that will not materialise.
The Fed is now reducing this deferred asset. But this will not help reduce the US fiscal deficit for
many years until the $240bn is repaid.

Paying off the Fed's accumulated losses will take years
Remittances due to the US Treasury ($bn)

0

-50

-100

What I’ve been reading and watching
JPMorgan’s chief executive Jamie Dimon has given Kevin Warsh the
thumbs up in the battle to become Fed chair. Whoever gets the nod will
work with all the current regional Fed presidents now that they have been
approved by the Fed’s board to serve another five-year term from March
2026. The vote came earlier than expected and was unanimous, surprising
everyone.
Frustrations with China’s growing trade surpluses are continuing, with
Mexico imposing up to 50 per cent tariffs on Chinese goods. The move was,
of course, made as much with an eye on maintaining Mexico’s trade deal
with the US.
Who would have thought a decade ago that Greece would supply the
Eurogroup member states with a president on a unanimous vote? It shows
how far the country has progressed since it ditched populism.
If you want some good news — relative to what is reported, at least — I
wrote about the UK economy being healthier than you’ve been told.

One last chart
Last week President Donald Trump enjoyed messing with the high expectations that his pick for
Fed chair would be Kevin Hassett. In an interview with the Wall Street Journal, he said the choice
was between the two Kevins (Hassett and Warsh).
Separately, Hassett has come under some fire for being perceived as both too close to Trump and a
threat to inflation. Bond investors have warned the US Treasury that Hassett does not have the
credibility they want.

The problem with these warnings is that there is nothing to see in the correlation between Hassett’s
odds of becoming Fed chair and five-year forward financial market break-even rates. If he really
did spook the market, this is where you would see higher inflation expectations.
There is nothing causal in the relationship below. But the negative correlation between the odds of
Hassett becoming chair and expected inflation suggests markets do not perceive him as an inflation
risk. Of course, market pricing can be wrong.

Financial markets think Kevin Hassett becoming Fed chair is benign for
inflation
Correlation between odds of Hassett becoming Fed chair and five-year inflation expectations from
August 2025

Five-year expected US CPI inflation

2.5

2.45

2.4

2.35

2.3

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

65

70

75

80

Probability of Kevin Hassett as Fed chair (%)
Sources: St Louis Fed, Polymarke

Central Banks is edited by Harvey Nriapia

Recommended newsletters for you
Free Lunch — Your guide to the global economic policy debate. Sign up here
The Lex Newsletter — Lex, our investment column, breaks down the week’s key themes, with
analysis by award-winning writers. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
Central banks
Federal Reserve
Chris Giles on Central Banks
Chris Giles

