FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Federal Reserve

The Fed’s future hangs in balance after Trump’s assault
The central bank does not work properly if a president can bend it to his will

CHRIS GILES

If Lisa Cook departs the Fed, President Trump will have a majority of appointees on the Fed’s board © Bloomberg

Chris Giles
Published AUG 26 2025

Donald Trump’s decision to fire Federal Reserve governor Lisa Cook is a pivotal moment. It signals
the US president’s switch from unpleasant name-calling of the Fed to an all-out assault on central
bank independence. There is every reason to fear for the survival of a key pillar of US and global
economic stability.

It is important to see the forest for the trees here. Do not get distracted by the detailed questions
over Cook’s mortgage applications, about which we know only a sketchy and one-sided story. What
we are seeing is a cold and calculated display of intent to ensure the Fed bends to the president’s
view of how to run the US economy.
The first question is why one person on the Fed’s seven-member board is so important when there
are 12 voting members on the interest rate-setting Federal Open Market Committee.
This is simpler that it sounds. If Cook departs the Fed, Trump will have a majority of appointees on
the Fed’s board. He picked Christopher Waller and Michelle Bowman in his last administration
and has nominated Stephen Miran to fill the vacant spot left earlier this month when Adriana
Kugler resigned. Waller and Bowman have already dissented from the majority decision at the July
meeting of the FOMC to hold interest rates.
Fed governors are supposed to leave politics at the doorstep when they enter the Eccles Building.
The institution does not work normally if partisan operatives are on the board and this appears to
be the president’s intention.
Unlike Fed governors, the other five members of the FOMC are regional Fed presidents and not
appointed by the president or confirmed by Congress. This puts them in a legally difficult
constitutional position if they were to join a minority of Fed board members to outvote the board’s
majority on interest rates.
According to former Fed governor and now professor Dan Tarullo of Harvard Law School, the
majority of the board could ultimately fire them, ensuring that a majority on the board was able to
prevail in setting monetary policy. He wrote last year that such a scenario would be “no way to run
a central bank”. “The FOMC personnel drama would consume financial markets. The projection of
a solid institutional footing, on which central banks rely for their credibility, would at least for a
time be undermined,” he added. That is true, but it is Trump’s way. If Cook leaves, few of the
FOMC can feel safe.

Of course, Cook can challenge her dismissal in the US courts and has vowed to do so. Judging by
how similar cases have fared with the judiciary, this promises to be a lengthy battle. Other heads of
non-partisan bodies, such as Gwynne Wilcox, who Trump fired as a member of the National
Labour Relations Board in January, have their cases still going through the courts but are not
allowed to serve until the decisions are final.
Lower courts reinstated them saying the president’s actions had been unlawful, but the Supreme
Court ultimately said it wanted the arguments heard and in the meantime more injury would be
done to the president if they continued to serve than the damage done to themselves or their
institutions if they sat it out. We do not know whether this will be the route through the courts that
Cook’s case will take, but it is a reasonable initial expectation.
Ultimately, those defending the Fed’s independence will rely on the Supreme Court, which has
form in seeing more value in a strong executive branch of government than in checks and balances.
Financial markets do not like Trump’s actions much, but there is no sign of the sort of meltdown
that is likely to get the president to reverse course.
While we wait for the courts process to resolve matters, there is little doubt that the Fed’s path of
least resistance is to bend economic arguments towards the president’s beliefs. Fed chair Jay
Powell has already indicated the Fed will cut rates in September, well before the tension between
inflation and labour market risks is resolved and we can expect further dovish tilts to come from
the Fed.
It is not a full-blown end to independence, but a slow demise in which the risks to US inflation can
only grow. Rates will be lower, markets might be happier for a while, but the risks grow.
And when there is the next financial crisis, the world will miss a fully independent Fed, ready to
lend dollars to the world when these are in shortage. There can be no guarantee that the Fed will
continue such actions if Trump is calling the shots.
The case of one Fed governor is not that significant on its own. But it is no exaggeration to say that
the Fed’s independence and role in the international financial system could hang on Cook’s fate
and experience with US judges. We should wish her well.

chris.giles@ft.com

PLAY | 01:24

Tej Parikh, the FT's economics leader writer, on Donald Trump's move to sack Fed governor Lisa Cook ©
Financial Times
Letter in response to this column:
Central bank independence — is it a virtue or a vice? / From Neville Hill, Co-CEO, Hybrid
Economics, Plaxtol, Kent, UK

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Chris Giles
Global Economy
US politics & policy
Central banks
Federal Reserve

