FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Lex

Brics: the mighty dollar is secure for now
But the US should not be complacent about the greenback’s primacy

Currency fluctuations, such as the dollar’s recent rise to a 20-year high, can cause real damage © Arshad Arbab/EPAEFE/Shutterstock

Published AUG 22 2023

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
Gripes about the greenback are nothing new. A French finance minister sniped at the “exorbitant
privilege” its hegemony conferred on the US nearly six decades ago. Geopolitical shifts present an
opportunity to challenge the dollar’s dominance. Witness the Brics development bank’s drive to
lend in local currencies. Its goal is to offer an alternative to the US-based financial order.

Discontent is understandable. Sanctions on Russia highlighted the risks of holding foreign reserves
in dollar-denominated assets. Currency fluctuations, notably the dollar’s recent rise to a 20-year
high, can cause real damage. A 10 per cent rise in the dollar cuts emerging economies’ output by 1.9
per cent after a year, says the IMF.
Principal reserve currencies have suffered before, for example the British pound’s decline after the
first world war. A shift away from the dollar could weaken the currency, raise US interest rates and
reduce demand for US Treasury securities. Some $7.4tn, or 31 per cent, of Treasuries were owned
by foreign investors at the end of last year. The market’s insouciance about the US debt burden
would quickly turn.
Yet an overthrow of the dollar is unlikely. It owes its dominance to network effects, the depth of US
capital markets and the rule of law. It has a hefty 58 per cent share of global official foreign
reserves, despite a drop of 13 percentage points since 2000. It dominates international banking
and global trade.
Russia has pivoted to the renminbi, which now accounts for 16 per cent of its export payments. But
other Brics countries, particularly India, are wary of Beijing’s potential dominance. That plus
currency controls makes them nervous. Their mooted development of a common currency is a nonstarter.
Nonetheless, the US should not be complacent about the greenback’s primacy. Sanctions that
weaponise the dollar should be used sparingly, with global financial stability kept in mind. The
dollar’s dominance carries responsibility as well as privilege.
Letter in response to this article:
The renminbi’s international ambitions grow apace
/ From Professor Paola Subacchi, Chair, Advisory
Board, Queen Mary Global Policy Institute, Queen
Mary University, London E1, UK

Lex is the FT’s concise daily
investment column. Expert writers in
four global financial centres provide
informed, timely opinions on capital
trends and big businesses. Click to
explore

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Lex
Global Economy

US dollar
Emerging markets
Brics

