FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion US inflation

Not enough good inflation news
And investor optimism fades

ROBERT ARMSTRONG

© Financial Times

Robert Armstrong
Published SEP 15 2021

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
This article is an on-site version of our Unhedged newsletter. Sign up here to get the newsletter
sent straight to your inbox every weekday

Welcome back. When inflation comes in lower than expected, and stocks can’t manage a rally,
something is going on. Not sure what it is. Are you? Email me if so: robert.armstrong@ft.com

Cheaper used cars leave markets cold
We know the August inflation report was more or less good news, because Treasuries rallied. Mr
Market seems to have seen nothing in the consumer price index numbers to make him think the
Fed will move it’s tapering/tightening schedule forward.
Core inflation (which leaves out food and energy) rose just 0.1 per cent from last month and 4 per
cent from a year ago. That’s the slowest rate in six months. Used car prices, though still a third
more expensive than a year ago, were a little cheaper than last month, suggesting that one of the
worst and most visible of the reopening bottlenecks is easing.
So, yay. But a lower-case yay: the good news was not good enough to plug the slow leak in stock
markets. The S&P 500 hissed lower again yesterday, and has now deflated by 2 per cent from the
highs of earlier this month.
While reopening inflation is giving way — witness those used car prices — some observers see
underlying sources of cyclical price pressure. Here is Paul Ashworth of Capital Economics, in a
note to clients:

Both rent and owners’ equivalent rent increased by 0.3 per cent month on
month, illustrating that the cyclical pressure coming from very tight labour
market conditions is seeping into consumer prices. The unprecedented surge
in other measures of rents suggests there is a lot more about to come down
that pipeline . . . [We] expect further declines [in reopening inflation] over
the coming months . . . But, look under the hood, and what we see is cyclical
inflation pressure continuing to build

I spoke to Ashworth yesterday. “The pandemic sparked a very dramatic labour shortage,” he told
me, as health worries, lack of childcare, enhanced government benefits, early retirements and
perhaps even a societal reassessment of work/life balance all coalesced. His worry is that wage
pressure jumps to other “sticky” prices — paradigmatically housing — and this leads to a wageprice spiral (for children of the ’70s such as myself, wage-price spirals were the monster our
parents scared us with when we were naughty).
Concerns like these are backed by this chart:

Wages are rising, but not nearly at the rate one would expect given the unprecedented explosion in
the number of unfilled jobs — 3m more than pre-pandemic levels. How long can this gap endure?
(The average hourly wage data probably understate wage inflation because of the return to work of
many low-skilled hospitality workers in recent months, which also explains the downward spike
this spring, with the arrival of vaccines.)
And if the CPI data do not convince you that there is not a cyclical increase in “sticky” prices,
maybe this map of urban rent increases from Apartment List, a rental search site, will convince
you:

In yesterday’s letter I called those who think that the markets are not pricing in enough inflation
risk “inflation neurotics”. I look at that map and wonder if I was too harsh.
Ashworth thinks it will be some time before the penny drops for inflation sceptics such as Federal
Reserve chair Jay Powell:

“It will be a mixed picture over the next 12 months. It is difficult to know if
the Fed will have to move. We expect inflation and core inflation to be down
next year. But the question is, does inflation get all the way down to [the
Fed’s] target? There will be a period of six to 12 months where Fed officials
will be able to say, ‘there you go, it’s coming down’ . . . But then the reopening
effects will give way and the cyclical components inflation will predominate.
That is when it will become clear to the Fed that inflation is not transitory.”

Fund managers own lots of stocks, and are sad
One chart neatly sums up the September edition of Bank of America’s much watched fund manager
surveys:

The proportion of the 232 fund managers surveyed by BofA who think the global economy is set to
improve has recently plummeted, from more than half to a small minority. Yet despite the
pessimism, vastly more managers overweight stocks than underweight — the difference is 50
percentage points, about as wide as it ever gets.* This is a rare combination, as the chart shows.
The pessimism theme runs right through the survey. The managers’ expectations for profit growth,
profit margins and inflation are all coming down. The proportion taking “higher than normal risk”
is rolling over. Few managers now think small caps or low-quality stocks will outperform. Cash
allocations, while low, are starting to rise.
At the same time, though, the managers want nothing to do with bonds. A whopping 69 per cent
are underweight fixed income (light blue lines):

Finally, the proportion of managers who say they have hedged their equities against a sharp fall in
the markets is the lowest it has been in three and half years.
I looked at all this and thought “dreary complacency”: pessimism mixed with the belief that stocks
will always remain the place to be, regardless. I put that phrase to David Jones, one of the BofA
strategists behind the survey, and he said he preferred “bearish bulls”:

“People are certainly long equities, maybe not quite as long as they have
been, but they just can’t justify putting a marginal dollar into fixed income at
these yield levels. So what else are they going to do?
“So you are seeing this dissonance between the macro outlook, which is
darkening, and continued investment in equities . . . Equity flows have been
incredibly strong; year to date for 2021 I think they are equivalent to the last
10 or 15 years . . . We are headed for a trillion-dollar year.”

Jones’s team thinks the tension between sentiment and allocation is most likely to be resolved by
declining enthusiasm for equities. They think the end of this year could be tough for stocks. The big
reason? They think the 40-year bull market for bonds is over, ended by Covid and the political,
fiscal and monetary changes that the pandemic has wrought. The super-low interest rates that have
kept stock valuations high are set to rise. Change is coming, gradually or quickly. This year’s
massive flows could dribble back into cash and bonds, or come out all at once, in a disorderly rush.
I’m not sure I buy Jones’s macro thesis. I am sure, however, that the BofA survey shows a
significant change in market sentiment. The ground is shifting.

One good read
The FT’s economics editor Chris Giles is excellent on how both sides of Brexit have shifted into
damage control mode.
*This article has been amended since original publication to correct the paragraph referring to
the BofA survey of fund managers

Recommended newsletters for you
Due Diligence — Top stories from the world of corporate finance. Sign up here
Swamp Notes — Expert insight on the intersection of money and power in US politics. Sign up
here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Robert Armstrong
Bonds
US economy

US inflation
US equities

