FT PROFESSIONAL

Unhedged US inflation

Inflation is not going quietly
And Apple’s legal fight

Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell. Inflation came in strong in services categories that have looked hot for a while: shelter, medical care
and auto services © FT montage/Bloomberg

Robert Armstrong & Ethan Wu
Published APR 11 2024

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
This article is an onsite version of our Unhedged newsletter. Premium subscribers can sign up
here to get the newsletter delivered every weekday. Standard subscribers can upgrade to
Premium here, or explore all FT newsletters

Good morning. We enjoyed meeting Unhedged readers at Tuesday’s FT Alphaville pub quiz in New
York, where a team from GIC, the Singaporean sovereign wealth fund, brought home gold. We
would’ve bombed the quiz ourselves. Questions included: “To the nearest thousand dollars, what is
the highest value of pizza that Domino’s Pizza’s chief executive may have received as part of his
compensation last year?” Email us: robert.armstrong@ft.com and ethan.wu@ft.com.

CPI: stuck
If three data points make a trend, then US inflation looks stuck at 3 per cent. That’s the message of
yesterday’s March consumer price index, the third stubbornly hot inflation report in a row. The
three-month average of core CPI is running north of 4 per cent, and the longer term averages aren’t
far behind:

It’s not quite as bad as the chart above suggests, because personal consumption expenditure
inflation, which the Federal Reserve targets, is running nearly 1 percentage point lower than CPI.
But the recent trend is clear and inflation concern is due.

The market reaction on Wednesday was big. Stocks fell, futures markets further lowered rate cut
expectations, and yields surged across the curve, led by the two-year which was up 23bp. The twoyear is still below 2023 highs but has risen nearly 75bp this year. It all reflects the view that the Fed
will keep rates higher for longer, and may not cut at all in 2024.
The reaction is justified by the composition of the March CPI data. Core services inflation rose an
annualised 6 per cent, and unlike in the past two reports, there were no big anomalies to blame.
Arguing CPI looks hot because of a start-of-the-year “January effect” price adjustment only works
for so long. Used car prices, which rose in February and lifted overall goods prices, fell 1 per cent in
March; goods deflation also resumed. Airfares and hotel prices, two volatile categories which can
throw off the data, were both well behaved.
Instead, inflation came in strong in services categories that have looked persistently hot for a while:
shelter, medical care and auto services. Shelter inflation again bucked longtime predictions that
it’ll fall to match the more benign trend shown by new lease data from the likes of Zillow. Medical
care was driven by strongly rising prices for hospital services (up 1.2 per cent in March), likely
reflecting big recent wage increases at major hospital systems.
Meanwhile, car insurance and auto repair shot up 2 per cent and 3 per cent, respectively, in March.
These two categories make up 7 per cent of core services inflation and have rather scary-looking
longer-term charts:

There is still a case for optimism. Though the labour market has broadly normalised already, wage
growth has ground down more slowly. The latest data suggest 4 per cent to 5 per cent wage growth,
compared to a pre-pandemic 3 per cent to 4 per cent. That could mean it’s only a matter of time
until slowing wage growth lessens price pressure on, say, hospital or car repair inflation. Shelter
inflation could also fall further, as analysts have long predicted. No one knows the “right” lag time
to expect between the Zillow rent and CPI rent data; it could simply be longer than anticipated.
Three months of sticky inflation is worrying, but could prove a bump in the road.
On balance, we think this CPI report is a blow to fast-disinflation optimism, and creates significant
uncertainty around rate-cut timing. So it makes sense markets flinched yesterday. The bigger
question for investors: how much did the recent rally depend on imminent rate cuts to begin with?
(Ethan Wu)

Apple lawsuits: different this time?
I have been covering tech companies on and off for a couple of decades, and all through that time
intelligent and well-informed people have been telling me, periodically, that some lawsuit or other
is going to do serious damage to the super-profitable business model of some Big Tech company.
Microsoft is the prime example here, but there is also Oracle vs Google, Motorola vs Qualcomm,
assorted efforts to restrain Google’s ad business, and so on. It is only a minor exaggeration to say
that none of this has ended up mattering one tiny little bit. Microsoft, which has had more legal
targets painted on its back than anyone, is the highest-valued corporation in the world.
So it is hard for me not to shrug off the US Department of Justice’s lawsuit against Apple, which
alleges the iPhone maker is a monopolist. This kind of thing has never mattered before. Why
should it now?
Dan Ives, an analyst at Wedbush who has a buy rating on Apple, says “it is different this time
because the pressure is building globally and the DoJ has struck when the iron is hot”. He says the
litigation is, on a risk scale of 1-10, an eight, whereas other tech litigation in recent decades was a
two or three. While he thinks the chances of the justice department forcing an overhaul of the
company’s business model are low — less than 20 per cent — this would have a big financial
impact.
The war on Apple is indeed multi-front. In Europe, the competition authorities have fined the
company €1.8bn for suppressing competition from rival music streaming services on its platform.
That’s a sum Apple will fish out from the couch cushions, but is a taste of the fines and remedies
that could come with the EU investigation of Apple’s and Google’s app stores under the Digital
Markets Act. Meanwhile in the US, the legal fight with Epic Games won’t go away. The Fortnite
game maker says Apple has violated a judge’s order to allow app developers to steer customers to
transaction platforms outside of the app store. And the justice department’s antitrust lawsuit
against Google’s search business threatens the payments Google makes to Apple to be the default
search engine on the iPhone — a large, pure-margin chunk of revenue.

All the legal challenges focus on a single, two-sided issue: Apple’s ability to trap consumers within
its iPhone ecosystem, and to extract payments from rivals who want to get at those consumers.
This basic issue applied to music streaming, transaction steering, watch-phone pairing, digital
wallets, and so-called “superapps”.
Nick Rodelli of CFRA Research, who specialises in legal questions, thinks the DoJ has a three-infour chance of winning the case and the victory surviving Supreme Court review. This outcome
might take as little as three years, he says. This puts Apple’s services revenue, which accounts for
about a third of operating profit, at risk. His central case is a 10 per cent hit to earnings per share —
a lot, for a company that is not growing earnings particularly quickly any more.
A more benign while still realistic view comes from Gene Munster of Deepwater Asset
Management. He too sees a significant chance of the DoJ successfully enforcing remedies on Apple
in many of the areas it is targeting — watches, wallets, superapps, and so on. But he thinks
increased openness may not lead to that much consumer switching. “Just because it is easier to
switch doesn’t mean people will.” People trust Apple as a brand, he says, because the products
work well. “It keeps coming back to who has the good products,” he says. The biggest worry, in his
view, is therefore the loss of the Google money.
This view chimes with Unhedged’s strong belief about the immense laziness of most people in most
domains. Investors need to think about the following equation. Estimate how much better a rival
product is than Apple’s, in terms of price or (subjective) quality. Subtract the (subjective) cost of
switching. If the result is negative, Apple should be OK. And remember, people loathe switching
their digital and financial infrastructure, even if it doesn’t take that long.
To simplify even more, the key question about Apple is still not about the legality of its business
model. It’s about the quality of its products. Are they still better, or at least not much worse?

One good read
Uptown problems.

FT Unhedged podcast
Can’t get enough of Unhedged? Listen to our
new podcast, hosted by Ethan Wu and Katie
Martin, for a 15-minute dive into the latest
markets news and financial headlines, twice a
week. Catch up on past editions of the
newsletter here.

Recommended newsletters for you
Swamp Notes — Expert insight on the intersection of money and power in US politics. Sign up
here
Due Diligence — Top stories from the world of corporate finance. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Technology sector
US inflation
Markets
Apple Inc
Federal Reserve

