FT PROFESSIONAL

US interest rates

Top Federal Reserve official says it would be ‘mistake’ to ignore Donald Trump’s tariffs
Austan Goolsbee warns it is ‘dangerous’ to overlook potential supply shocks triggered by trade war

Austan Goolsbee: ‘We saw in Covid times that the more complex the supply chain, the longer it took to manage’ © David Paul
Morris/Bloomberg

Claire Jones in London
Published FEB 5 2025

A top Federal Reserve official warned it would be “a mistake” to underestimate the potential for
Donald Trump’s planned tariffs to push up prices.
Austan Goolsbee, president of the Chicago Fed, on Wednesday said central banks’ tendency to
follow “pure economic theory” and ignore supply shocks such as tariffs was “dangerous”.
The US faced a “series” of challenges to the supply chain, Goolsbee said, including strikes and
natural disasters. The economy also faced “the threat of large tariffs and the potential for an
escalating trade war”, he added.

“These threats are not of the scale of what occurred during the pandemic but passing over their
potential consequences would be a mistake,” he said.
The comments from one of the Fed’s top officials, and a member of the central bank’s rate-setting
panel, come just days after the president threatened to impose 25 per cent tariffs on two of the US’s
biggest trade partners, Mexico and Canada.
Trump on Monday afternoon said he was postponing the levies on Canada and Mexico for 30 days
but hit China with tariffs of 10 per cent, prompting Beijing to announce tariffs of its own on some
US imports.
Goolsbee’s remarks contrast with Fed chair Jay Powell, who last week said rate-setters would need
to “wait and see” the impact of tariffs before deciding how they would affect their interest rate
decisions.
Following the decision to hold interest rates in the 4.25 per cent to 4.5 per cent range, Powell said:
“We don’t know what’s going to be tariff[ed], we don’t know for how long or how much, what
countries, we don’t know about retaliation, we don’t know how it’s going to transmit through the
economy to consumers. That really does remain to be seen.”
Still, most private economists expect tariffs to be inflationary, and expectations for Fed rate cuts
this year have fallen considerably since autumn as price growth has remained above the central
bank’s target.
Trump has said he wants borrowing costs to fall by “a lot” and that we would speak to Powell
regularly. However, US Treasury secretary Scott Bessent denied the president was pressuring the
Fed, saying in an interview with Fox Business on Wednesday that Trump’s focus was on lowering
longer-term government borrowing costs and that the administration was focused on the yield on
the 10-year US Treasury note.
Goolsbee said the “overwhelming” lesson from the pandemic was that central bankers should not
ignore supply-side shocks, saying these had been “the most important drivers of inflation over the
past five years”.

“We saw in Covid times that the more complex the supply chain, the longer it took to manage,” he
said in prepared remarks.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US trade
Trade disputes
US politics & policy
US inflation
US interest rates

