FT PROFESSIONAL

Disrupted Times Global Economy

Inflation eases in the US and eurozone raising hopes of rate cuts
Also in this newsletter: left-wing firebrand George Galloway wins by-election, and the damage Covid-19 does
to memory

Eurozone inflation eased to 2.6 per cent in February, slightly higher than the 2.5 per cent expected by economists © REUTERS

Leah Quinn and Alexander James
Published MAR 1 2024

This article is an on-site version of our Disrupted Times newsletter. Sign up here to get the
newsletter sent straight to your inbox three times a week

Today’s top stories
Firebrand left-wing politician George Galloway has won the Rochdale byelection, claiming in his victory speech that he’ll be Starmer’s “worst
nightmare”.
Global carbon dioxide emissions from energy surged to a record high in
2023, hitting 37.4bn tonnes, according to the International Energy Agency.
Germany and France called for an international investigation into the
deaths of dozens of Gazans seeking humanitarian aid after Israeli troops
opened fire close to an aid convoy.
For up-to-the-minute news updates, visit our live blog

Good evening.
Inflation in the United States and the 20-country eurozone is easing, fuelling speculation that
central banks may cut interest rates later this year after record-high rates since the Covid-19
pandemic and Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine in February 2022.
US inflation eased to 2.4 per cent in the year to January, according to data published yesterday on
personal consumption expenditures, slipping from December’s rate of 2.6 per cent. The core rate
for PCE, which excludes changes in food and energy prices and is the Fed’s preferred measure of
underlying inflation, was also in line with expectations at 2.8 per cent.
In the eurozone, inflation eased to 2.6 per cent in February. The figure was higher than the 2.5 per
cent expected by economists as the cost of living for consumers continued to rise at persistently
strong rates.

In the US, rate setters remain cautious. The Federal Reserve is unwilling to lower borrowing costs
from current levels of 5.25 per cent to 5.5 per cent until it is confident price pressures have
sustainably returned to its 2 per cent target.
Meanwhile, the European Central Bank is set to meet next week to discuss the future direction of
interest rates amid signs the economy remains mired in stagnation.
“The ECB is concerned about persistence in domestically generated inflation,” said Tomasz
Wieladek, an economist at investor T Rowe Price, adding that services inflation was “clearly too
strong”.
Senior ECB policymakers have played down the likelihood of an imminent rate cut while they
assess if wage pressures are moderating enough to push inflation towards its 2 per cent target.
The inflation data lifted investor confidence in Europe, with the pan-European Stoxx 600 up 0.5
per cent and close to a record high. Shares in New York were higher in late-morning trading, with
the S&P 500 up 0.2 per cent and the tech-heavy Nasdaq 0.4 per cent higher.

Need to know: UK and Europe economy
UK house prices rose more than expected in February, posting their first annual increase in
more than a year, according to mortgage lender Nationwide.

A total of 117 MPs across all major political parties have written to the chancellor Jeremy Hunt
urging him to allocate funding to compensate victims of the infected blood scandal in his spring
Budget next week.
Thomas Jordan, the long-standing chair of the Swiss National Bank, has announced his
resignation, bringing to an end a turbulent tenure of unorthodox policymaking. Jordan, who is the
longest-serving governor of any major central bank, will step down in September.
Tech mania has gripped Turkey’s stock market with equities gaining 20 per cent in dollar terms
as runaway inflation sends local savers piling into shares.

Need to know: global economy
Economic growth in Brazil stalled in the fourth quarter as consumer spending and agricultural
production declined, signalling a slowdown in Latin America’s largest economy. Annual GDP
growth was 2.1 per cent in the three months to December 31, down 0.1 percentage points from the
previous quarter, the government statistics agency said earlier today.
China’s manufacturing activity has slowed for the fifth consecutive month with the country’s
manufacturing purchasing managers’ index slipping to 49.1 in February from 49.2 in January.
The cobalt market has been overwhelmed by a record glut as Chinese companies boost their
output, with the surplus of the key electric car battery metal set to last until 2028, according to an
influential market report.
A US-born former Hollywood financier Philip Adkins is supplying Russia’s liquefied natural gas
station in the Arctic Circle. The project, which is heavily sanctioned by the US in an attempt to
curb Moscow’s influence on global energy markets, could significantly increase Russia’s share in
the global LNG market.

Need to know: business
Elon Musk has sued OpenAI and its chief executive Sam Altman for breach of contract, alleging
they have compromised the start-up’s original mission of building artificial intelligence systems for
the benefit of humanity.

Figure AI aims to introduce artificial intelligence-powered humanoid robots to the workforce © Figure AI

This comes after OpenAI, along with Microsoft, Nvidia and Amazon, was named as an investor in
Figure AI, a Silicon Valley start-up that aims to introduce artificial intelligence-powered
humanoid robots to the workforce and transform the global labour market.
The broadcaster ITV has sold its 50 per cent stake in BritBox International, a subscription
streaming service, to BBC studios for £235mn. The deal comes as ITV faces fresh pressure on its
balance sheet from a steep decline in advertising revenues.
Australian prime minister Anthony Albanese is “very concerned” about the impact of Meta’s latest
move to stop paying local media companies this year for using their content.
Joe Biden has ordered an investigation into whether Chinese “connected” vehicles, including
electric cars, pose a security risk to America, in a move seen as trying to prevent China from
flooding the US auto market.
Boeing is set to pay $51mn to settle a US administrative charge over unauthorised exports, to
countries including China, of technical data related to a range of US military weaponry including
fighter jets and missile systems.

Science round-up
Prices for lab monkeys in China have plummeted, indicating a slowdown in the future pipeline of
drugs undergoing clinical trials.
New research highlights the damage to cognition and memory from Covid-19, which can cause
symptoms such as “brain fog”. The study shows however that the most severe cases can improve.
German pharma group Boehringer Ingelheim and Copenhagen-based Zealand Pharma said
their weight-loss drug had achieved positive results in liver disease trials.
“Future-proofed” vaccines are being developed by a UK start-up using artificial intelligence.
Baseimmune uses AI to help it predict future pathogen mutations in order to make jabs for
coronavirus, malaria and African swine fever that will be more effective for longer.
Commentator Anjana Ahuja says putting a corporate figure at the head of publicly-funded UK
science rather than someone from a research background would be a serious mistake. The
possibility has been mooted for when Dame Ottoline Leyser steps down in 2025 as chief executive
of UK Research and Innovation.

Some good news
Scientists from the University of Texas have managed to photograph the yellow-crested
helmetshrike while trekking 75 miles through the Itombwe Massif mountain range in eastern
Democratic Republic of Congo. The bird was listed as ‘lost’ by the American Bird Conservancy and
had gone more than 20 years without being seen.

Recommended newsletters
Working it — Discover the big ideas shaping today’s workplaces with a weekly newsletter from
work & careers editor Isabel Berwick. Sign up here
The Climate Graphic: Explained — Understanding the most important climate data of the week.
Sign up here

Thanks for reading Disrupted Times. If this newsletter has been forwarded to you, please sign
up here to receive future issues. And please share your feedback with us at
disruptedtimes@ft.com. Thank you

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Eurozone inflation
Global Economy
Science
US
Disrupted Times

