FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Unhedged

What the Fed should do
Inflation is the biggest risk

ROBERT ARMSTRONG

© FT montage

Robert Armstrong and Hakyung Kim
Published SEP 16 2025

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
This article is an on-site version of our Unhedged newsletter. Premium subscribers can sign up
here to get the newsletter delivered every weekday. Standard subscribers can upgrade to
Premium here, or explore all FT newsletters

Good morning. US President Donald Trump says companies should not have to report financial
results every quarter; reporting just twice a year would save money and promote long-term
thinking, he says. Unhedged is all for lower overhead costs, but the idea that semi-annual reporting
would cure public companies’ strategic myopia strikes us as bonkers. What is the difference
between massaging the numbers every three months versus every six, when the planning horizons
for projects that really matter extends to years? Email us: unhedged@ft.com.

What the Fed should do
Tomorrow the Federal Reserve’s Open Market Committee announces a rate decision. The market
nearly unanimously expects a 25 basis point cut, and projects four or five more quarter-point
reductions in the following twelve months.
The consensus is strong enough that a quarter point more or less, or a strong signal that Fed is not
solidly in sequential cutting mode, will move markets. A 25-point difference in overnight interest
rates does not make much of a direct difference to the economy. But with the Fed stuck between its
two mandates — the labour market is weakening and inflation is stuck above target — what matters
is what the committee reveals about which end of the mandate it will prioritise, and how it will
react when new data arises.
We think the deep consensus around a tidy series of quarter-point rate cuts conceals a wide range
of possibilities: it might be the correct median projection, but it would be a mistake to ignore the
wide range of outcomes on either side. With that in mind, we present the arguments for a single cut
tomorrow; for a dovish jumbo cut; and for a hawkish no-cut. Then we’ll say who we think is right.
The argument for a 25 basis point cut (consensus): With the annual revisions of the
payrolls data now in, we know that the labour market has created far fewer new jobs in the past 12
months than in the prior year or two. This trend is confirmed by a gradual slowdown in measures
of final demand (such as real final sales to private domestic purchasers). Part of the job slowdown
is due to lower labour supply, from an ageing, native-born population and an immigration
crackdown. Even so, Rick Rieder of BlackRock writes:

The velocity of labor and/or labor mobility is now extremely low. We think
that the mortgage rate being too high has also slowed labor mobility, and for
all of these reasons, the Fed will be justified in moving to cut policy rates,
and we wouldn’t be surprised if they chose to move more aggressively from
here
Given this, “it’s better to get ahead of [the labour market] as, historically, once unemployment
starts rising, it keeps rising,” as Seema Shah of Principal Asset Management put it to Unhedged.
Yes, inflation is flat to up, but most of the upward impulse comes from goods inflation as
companies absorb a one-time shock from tariffs.
And remember, because the market has priced in a series of cuts, failing to cut is not a neutral
move: it’s a tightening of financial conditions.
The argument for a 50 basis point jumbo cut (dovish): All the reasons for a 25 point cut
apply, and on top of them, the data from rate-sensitive industries and indicators of sentiment are
slipping badly. The employment component of the manufacturing purchasing managers' index is
deep into contraction, and permits for new housing construction are at a four-year low. The
Michigan consumer survey’s employment expectations component is at recessionary levels.
“The Fed needs to be more concerned about the economic circumstances of the labour market than
they are about inflation,” Kevin Philip at Bel Air Investment Advisors told Unhedged. “I don’t think
the Fed will close its eyes to high interest rates on credit card debt — which just hit an all-time high
this past month — as well as high mortgage rates for residential and commercial spaces.” Inflation
remaining slightly elevated at about 3 per cent, but within the Fed’s control, wouldn’t be terrible.
“There’s two ways to deal with debt: you pay it down, or you inflate your way out of it,” he said.
The argument for not cutting yet (hawkish): Inflation is a much more serious risk than the
doves, and even the consensus, think. Don’t get lost in the thousand possible tweaks to the data. On
all broad measures, goods inflation is rising and services inflation is rooted above target.

Adam Posen of the Peterson Institute pointed out to Unhedged that tariff pass-through to prices
appears to be picking up rather than subsiding. At the same time, he says, the labour market is
tighter than consensus appreciates. The prime age labour force participation rate is near its alltime high (at 84 per cent). Wage growth is solid (above 4 per cent annually, high enough to
promote services inflation). The break-even jobs number has fallen with net immigration.
A further point: Matt Klein points out at The Overshoot (as Unhedged has pointed out before) that
household balance sheets are extremely strong, making further stimulus dangerous. “American
households have enormous untapped financial firepower at their disposal,” Klein writes. “Any
attempt to meaningfully open the taps risks unleashing a massive flood of additional consumer
spending, much of which would probably get translated into higher prices rather than higher
output.”
Finally, financial conditions generally are loose. Stock prices are high. There is gobs of liquidity.
Credit spreads (and spreads of spreads) are very tight. Bank credit is growing nicely, the IPO
market is open again. There is unlimited money available for Big Tech companies to invest in AI. Is
this a market we want to throw gasoline on?
Unhedged’s view: We’re with the hawks. Resurgent inflation is the scariest risk right now, and
not just in the sense that inflation eats away at purchasing power and grinds down sentiment. We
think another bout of inflation could cause a market crash. Risk asset valuations are bubbly and the
US fiscal position is precarious. Unmoored inflation expectations could lead to a spiral in longterm interest rates that would make the US debt burden unmanageable and crush risk markets. A
25 basis point cut tomorrow is fine, but the Fed needs to be very careful to signal that further cuts
depend on the data. This is all the more true given the administration’s fantastically unwise attacks
on Fed independence have left the bank’s credibility open to question.

One good read
Nepal’s Marie Antoinette moment.

FT Unhedged podcast
Can’t get enough of Unhedged? Listen to our
new podcast, for a 15-minute dive into the
latest markets news and financial headlines,
twice a week. Catch up on past editions of
the newsletter here.

Recommended newsletters for you
Due Diligence — Top stories from the world of corporate finance. Sign up here
The Lex Newsletter — Lex, our investment column, breaks down the week’s key themes, with
analysis by award-winning writers. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Robert Armstrong
Unhedged
Global Economy
US economy
US inflation

