FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion The Long View

Inflation alarm focuses the minds of investors
Markets take their cue from hawkish central banks rather than fears over Ukraine
fallout

KATIE MARTIN

ECB president Christine Lagarde said the Ukraine war would of course have a “material impact on economic activity” © Alex
Kraus/Bloomberg

Katie Martin
Published MAR 11 2022

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
One of the first big market bets to emerge from the Russian invasion of Ukraine was that central
banks would take fright.

A massive rally in government bonds – in the UK’s case, the biggest since the EU referendum in
2016 – was a clear sign that investors thought they would take this opportunity to slow or delay the
process of jacking up interest rates.
Not so fast. On Thursday, the European Central Bank concluded its regular two-day rate setting
meeting and indicated it would stick to its hawkish path. All things are relative – this was hawkish
only for a central bank that has its main interest rate wedged below zero per cent. But it scaled back
its bond-buying stimulus scheme and said net purchases could stop in the third quarter if the war
in Ukraine keeps bumping up inflation expectations. The first rate rise in over a decade could still
come this year.
Sporting a bright brooch in the colours of the Ukrainian flag, ECB president Christine Lagarde said
the war would, of course, have a “material impact on economic activity”. Naturally, the path from
here depends on how the economic data turn out.
But all the market can hear is “keep calm and carry on”. The euro popped higher. Bond prices fell.
“President Lagarde was at pains to highlight the uncertainty that the war in Ukraine presented and
characterised the tapering change as an increase in optionality for the ECB in both directions;
something that fails to pass the smell test in our opinion,” said Andrew Mulliner, head of global
aggregate at Janus Henderson Investors. “This ECB seems to be for a reduction of accommodative
policy at all costs.”
With the US Federal Reserve due to make its own pronouncement on rates next week, and US
inflation standing close to 8 per cent, this is a message worth heeding.
“I feel like we are somewhat trapped here,” says Greg Peters, chief investment officer at PGIM
Fixed Income. Either geopolitical risk intensifies further, shoving commodity prices even higher
and nourishing the hawks on rate-setting committees, or geopolitics miraculously calm down, the
global economy springs back and the hawks stay in control. Either way, the hawks win. “The
market is not thinking about this properly at all,” he says.
This is still likely to be a bigger drag on US markets than the war in Ukraine, which has, so far at
least, been a very local affair.

At the epicentre, Russian markets have, of course, been fried to a crisp. Moving westward, the
damage is also clear. Central banks in Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary have been forced in
to a combination of interest rate rises and interventions to support their currencies. This was to try
to tame the likely inflationary impact of weaker currencies combined with pricier commodities.
Beyond that, very conspicuously, European markets have suffered a much heavier blow than the
US. Outflows from European equity funds have smashed records. This is not an indiscriminate
flight to safety.
In stocks, the German market dropped by a hefty 15 per cent from the start of Russia’s invasion to
March 7. US stocks, meanwhile, dropped heavily on day one and then sprang back. They have just
ended this week around the same level as they were when the invasion began.
“You can draw a correlation map between proximity to the conflict areas and market impact,” says
Kasper Elmgreen, head of equities at Amundi in Dublin. In some cases, this might generate
opportunities to pick up bargains. “When markets panic, they get irrational, and opportunities
emerge. The human bias is not to do anything. But you have to act on the opportunities in front of
you.”
So where does this all leave professional investors? It is not supposed to be an easy job, but they
are now up against the prospect of sky-high inflation while there is a pullback or even reversal in
economic growth. And there is the risk that the defenestration of Russia from the global financial
system could throw out unexpected stink bombs.
“Russia might not matter as an economy but it matters as part of supply chains,” Elmgreen says.
“There could be some trouble brewing that we have not thought about.”
Already, oil and gas – two of Russia’s main exports beyond human misery – have rocketed in price.
Some European companies are likely to buckle under the strain. Worldwide trading in nickel,
another Russian speciality, has effectively ground to halt after one trader’s bet against a rise in
price blew up in spectacular fashion. Wheat prices have soared.

Generally speaking, in comparison to, say, March 2020, when Covid (remember that?) briefly
pulled the rug from under the entire financial system, markets have functioned pretty normally
through the shock of war. But it is a brave investor who assumes this will continue.
“I feel a little better about this stuff,” says Peters at PGIM, noting that central banks’ enhancements
to the global financial-market plumbing brought in during the Covid shock are still available to
avert disasters. “But we’re watching carefully. An accident is almost expected at this point.”
katie.martin@ft.com

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Katie Martin
The Long View
Global Economy
Global inflation
War in Ukraine

