FT PROFESSIONAL

Federal Reserve

Federal Reserve implements first half-point interest rate rise since 2000
US central bank says further increases of same size should be ‘on the table’ at next two meetings

Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell said the central bank had ‘both the tools we need and the resolve that it will take to restore price
stability’ © Saul Loeb/AFP/Getty

Colby Smith in Washington and Kate Duguid in New York
Published MAY 4 2022 | Updated MAY 4 2022, 16:10

The Federal Reserve raised its benchmark policy rate by half a percentage point for the first time
since 2000 and sent a strong signal that it intended to increase it by the same amount at the next
two meetings.
At the end of its two-day policy meeting on Wednesday, the Federal Open Market Committee lifted
the target range of the federal funds rate to a range of 0.75 per cent to 1 per cent.
It was the first time since 2006 that the Fed has implemented rate increases at back-to-back
meetings and came as the US central bank embraces a more aggressive approach to tackling high
inflation.

The Fed raised rates a quarter of a percentage point at its March meeting from the near-zero level
where it had hovered since the onset of the coronavirus pandemic.
Top officials have backed a much more rapid withdrawal of the pandemic-era stimulus in light of
one of the tightest labour markets in history and signs that price pressures are becoming
entrenched.
In a press conference following the announcement, Fed chair Jay Powell said: “There is a broad
sense on the committee that additional 50 basis point increases should be on the table at the next
couple of meetings.”
However, he added that a 0.75 percentage point rate rise was “not something that the committee is
actively considering”.
Powell said the Fed had “both the tools we need and the resolve that it will take to restore price
stability” but warned of further inflationary pressures stemming from supply chain bottlenecks
caused by the war in Ukraine and Covid-19 lockdowns in China.
The rate increase marked the Fed’s latest step to “expeditiously” shift monetary policy to a socalled neutral position that neither speeds up nor slows down economic activity.
Officials have suggested a neutral federal funds rate is somewhere between 2 and 3 per cent, but
many economists believe it is much higher, given how much inflation has overshot the Fed’s 2 per
cent target. Core inflation, as measured by the central bank’s preferred personal consumption
expenditures price index, reached 5.2 per cent in March compared with the previous year.
Powell said a neutral rate was “not something we can identify with any precision” and insisted the
Fed “will not hesitate” to go beyond that threshold if warranted by the data.
If the Fed delivers half-point rate rises in June and July and then raises rates by a quarter-point at
each of the remaining meetings in September, November and December, the fed funds rate would
hover between 2.5 and 2.75 per cent by the end of the year.

Fed officials argued the US economy was strong enough to withstand tighter monetary policy
without falling into a recession. Powell said there was a “good chance” of a “soft or softish landing”,
pointing to the strength of household and corporate balance sheets and the strong labour market.
However, earlier on Wednesday, US Treasury secretary Janet Yellen, who preceded Powell as Fed
chair, said the central bank would need to be “skilful and also lucky” to achieve a soft landing.
David Kelly, chief global strategist at JPMorgan, said: “This is a Fed that has cooed like doves for a
decade and now they’re trying to squawk like hawks, very loudly. But I still think this is a dovish
Fed, and I believe they will have a chance to return to their dovish nature later in the year.”
Markets reacted positively to Powell’s comments that appeared to rule out a 0.75 percentage point
rate increase, with the S&P 500 and Nasdaq Composite indices rising to their highest levels in a
week.
The two-year Treasury yield, which moves with interest rate expectations, fell 0.12 percentage
points to 2.66 per cent. Investors in the futures market are now betting that the Fed’s critical
interest rate will be 2.79 per cent at the end of the year, down from 2.88 per cent on Tuesday.
The Fed reiterated its optimistic outlook in its policy statement, saying it expected the labour
market to remain “strong” with “appropriate firming in the stance of monetary policy” that would
bring inflation back to the target range.
The Fed also detailed its plans to pare back its $9tn balance sheet by shrinking its portfolio of
Treasuries and agency mortgage-backed securities, which has ballooned since early 2020 as it
hoovered up bonds to support the economy.
The central bank will begin reducing its holdings in June using a process known as run-off whereby
it stops reinvesting the proceeds of maturing securities.
The Fed will initially cap the run-off at $30bn a month for Treasuries and $17.5bn for agency MBS
and will increase the threshold over three months to as much as $60bn and $35bn, respectively.

When the amount of maturing Treasuries falls below the $60bn cap, the Fed will make up the
difference by reducing its holdings of shorter-dated Treasury bills. Investors expect the Fed will
also have to resort to outright sales of agency MBS at some point, given the date that some of its
securities are expected to mature.
The central bank is moving much more quickly than it did when it last attempted to shrink its
balance sheet. That process kicked off roughly two years after the Fed first raised rates in 2015
following the global financial crisis. Then, it set a $10bn monthly cap, which was gradually lifted to
$50bn.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
US economy
US inflation
US interest rates
Central banks

