FT PROFESSIONAL

Federal Reserve

Jay Powell says Federal Reserve will keep tightening until inflation has been tamed
US central bank ‘won’t hesitate at all’ to lift rates above ‘neutral’ if needed to control rising prices, chair says

Jay Powell has acknowledged the challenges to engineering a ‘soft or softish landing’ for the US economy as interest rates rise © JIM
LO SCALZO/EPA-EFE/Shutterstock

Colby Smith in Washington
Published MAY 17 2022

Jay Powell said the Federal Reserve will continue tightening monetary policy until it sees “clear
and convincing” evidence that inflation is coming back down towards the US central bank’s
longstanding 2 per cent target.
The Fed chair on Tuesday sought to affirm the central bank’s commitment to taming price
pressures, saying restoring price stability was essential to the smooth functioning of the economy
and vowing to raise interest rates to a level that actively constrains demand if necessary.
“What we need to see is inflation coming down in a clear and convincing way, and we’re going to
keep pushing until we see that,” he said during an interview at a Wall Street Journal event.

As part of the Fed’s plans to move monetary policy “expeditiously” to a “neutral” setting that no
longer stimulates demand, the Fed has raised interest rates by 0.75 of a percentage point since
March from near-zero levels that had been in place for roughly two years.
Further 0.5 percentage point rate rises such as the one the central bank implemented earlier this
month are likely, with at least two more in the next two months.
The Fed may consider a fourth half-point rate rise at its policy meeting in September if inflation
does not moderate significantly by then, before dialling back the size of its increases to quarterpoint increments. Traders now expect the federal funds rate to reach roughly 2.8 per cent by the
end of the year, a sizeable jump from its current level of between 0.75 to 1 per cent.
That is also within the 2 to 3 per cent range that Fed officials have previously indicated is
considered “neutral” when inflation is at 2 per cent.
Powell on Tuesday said the Fed “won’t hesitate at all” to raise rates above neutral if warranted by
the data, although he reiterated that officials do not know with “any confidence” where that level is,
given the strength of the labour market and the extent to which inflation is above the central bank’s
target.
He said the Fed would instead look at how financial conditions and the economy are adapting in
real time.
Powell’s comments come at a sensitive moment for global financial markets, which have gyrated
wildly in recent weeks as investors weigh the odds of the US tipping into a recession as the Fed
tries to tame high inflation.
Powell added that there are “pathways” for the Fed to damp demand and bring down inflation
without substantial labour market losses, although he said the unemployment rate may rise “a few
ticks” from its very low 3.6 per cent level today.

That would constitute a “soft or softish landing”, he said, although he acknowledged significant
challenges to achieving that — including the run-up in commodity prices as a result of the war in
Ukraine, which he said has “added to the degree of difficulty to what was already a challenging
project”.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US inflation
US interest rates
Central banks
Federal Reserve
Jerome H. Powell

