FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Unhedged

What just happened?
There is precious little logic left in the market

ROBERT ARMSTRONG

© Financial Times

Robert Armstrong & Ethan Wu
Published MAY 6 2022

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
This article is an on-site version of our Unhedged newsletter. Sign up here to get the newsletter
sent straight to your inbox every weekday

Good morning. On Wednesday, stocks and bonds rose merrily after the Fed chair said that 75 basis
point rate increases were not under active discussion by the Open Market Committee. This struck
us as weird, given that chair Jay Powell was at pains to emphasise his focus on inflation and his
willingness to be more aggressive if needed. He just didn’t sound dovish to us. Thursday, both
stocks and bonds fell hard, more than reversing the prior day’s moves. For a moment we felt
vindicated. Closer examination of the facts left us puzzled once again. Below, we try to make sense
of the gyrations, to the degree possible. Email us: robert.armstrong@ft.com and ethan.wu@ft.com.
We’re taking Monday off. While we’re away, read the FT’s Asset Management newsletter, which
comes out on Mondays.

Very bad day follows very good day
Here’s a thumbnail sketch of what happened Thursday:

The S&P 500 fell 3.5 per cent
The Nasdaq fell 5 per cent
Long-dated Treasury yields rose — the 10-year by 14 basis points, to hit
3.06 per cent
Short-dated treasuries rose, but by less — the 2-year rose 8 basis
points, to 2.71 per cent
Inflation-protected Treasury yields rose — the 10-year by 13 basis
points, to hit 0.184 per cent
Commodities were stable to up — oil, gold and copper all rose slightly
The Vix volatility index hit 31 — high, but no higher than the peaks of
recent weeks. Indeed it hit 36 on Monday.

All of these moves, except for commodities, were meaty. This was a big across-the-board sell-off.
Bonds provided no shelter from the carnage in stocks.
What happened? Is there a coherent and compelling narrative here? There doesn’t have to be.
When the trend is downward, volatility is up, and liquidity is patchy, markets reflect portfolio
decisions made under duress more than they reflect stable economic realities. Still, amid the
wreckage, the market might be telling us something useful.
A few broad possibilities:

1 Market participants realised Wednesday, en masse, that the Fed was much
more hawkish than they had concluded initially. So short rates must rise,
and with them, the possibility of a recession. Stocks do not like recessions.

2 Market participants realised Wednesday, en masse, that the Fed was even
more dovish than they concluded initially, so inflation was more likely to be
higher for longer. So long rates must rise, commodities look more
attractive. Stocks do not like runaway inflation, either.

3 It’s not all about the Fed. Maybe investors are simply realising that the
outlooks for the economy, corporate earnings and speculative appetite are
not very good.
Possibility #1 makes sense inasmuch as short rates fell hard as Powell spoke Wednesday, and then
rose Thursday. And stocks got killed, which fits. But short rates didn’t rise that much, and long
yields rose even more, an odd response to a recession.

If the idea here is that, inspired by the ghost of Paul Volcker, Powell is going to push us into a
recession, the yield curve should be flattening. But it’s steepening.
Possibility #2 makes sense in that the difference between nominal and inflation-protected yields
widened, increasing so-called “inflation break-evens”. Also the relative strength of commodities
amid the chaos makes sense if more inflation is coming. Higher long rates fit higher inflation as
well. But 10-year break-evens rose only a little, and only did that because nominal yields rose like
mad. Five-year break-evens actually fell a smidgen. If inflation panic were worsening, I’d expect
inflation-protected yields to fall, or at least not rise as much as they did Wednesday. Further, the
two-year closely tracks expectations for the fed funds rate. Why did it rise if we’ve all decided
Powell is a terrible wimp?
If the pieces don’t quite fit for #1 and #2, we can turn happily to #3, which is flexible and allpurpose. Let us briefly recall the five most salient features of this investing environment:

Strong consumer and corporate balance sheets
Inflation, which is driven in some significant part by supply shocks from
Covid and war, which central bank monetary tools cannot solve
Slowing economic growth, as seen in everything from global PMIs to falling
trucking rates
Central banks that are tightening despite the supply issues and slowing
growth — as personified Wednesday by the Bank of England, which
yesterday both warned of recession and increased interest rates
Very high stock valuations
Only the first item is supportive of risk assets. The others are negative, and compound one another.
Very bad days just happen when the backdrop is this poor.
The last point on that list is likely becoming more important. We have not spoken very much about
high valuations at Unhedged, because for many years most valuation measures have been sending
bad signals. Stocks have looked expensive on traditional metrics for much of the last decade, but
they have continued to rise. Referring to, say, Robert Shiller’s cyclically adjusted P/E ratio has been
liable to get a person made fun of online. But now that the momentum is downward, and we are
wondering how low stocks can go rather than how high they can reach, it may be time to think
about valuations again. Here is Shiller’s ratio, which divides the price of the S&P 500 by 10-year
average earnings:

There has been a fair amount of talk from brokers recently about how recent price declines have
made valuations more attractive. But this ignores cyclicality. Specifically, it ignores the fact (which
we recently discussed here) that Covid-era margins have been extraordinarily high and seem likely
to come down. Adjust for this, as the Shiller ratio does, and stock prices still look very high. This
doesn’t tell you that they have to come down, but it removes a key psychological support in a
stressful time.
We are left with a final puzzle. After a stomach-churning few days, why isn’t the Vix higher? Garrett
DeSimone, head of research at OptionMetrics, likes to say the Vix can be seen as the cost of
insuring a stock portfolio against declines. If things are so bad, why isn’t the price of insurance
rising more? DeSimone thinks it suggests that things might calm down in the coming days. But
there is another possibility: that people don’t want insurance. They’d rather just sell.

One good read
American nationalists have a thing about cat ladies. This makes perfect sense.

Recommended newsletters for you
Due Diligence — Top stories from the world of corporate finance. Sign up here
Swamp Notes — Expert insight on the intersection of money and power in US politics. Sign up
here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Robert Armstrong
Unhedged
Global inflation
Equities
Federal Reserve

