FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion The FT View

Emerging markets need to get ahead of inflation
Price pressures are greater and central banks less trusted to keep them under control

THE EDITORIAL BOARD

A woman buys oranges at the Feira Livre market on the streets of the Liberdade neighbourhood in Sao Paulo. Brazil is one of a group
of middle- income countries that have started to raise rates © Nelson Almeida/AFP/Getty

The editorial board
Published OCT 7 2021

For central bankers in rich countries the case in favour of tightening monetary policy sooner rather
than later is finely balanced. Wait too long and inflation could get out of hand, go too early and the
still-fragile recovery could falter. For emerging markets, on the other hand, the arguments are
tilted firmly towards one side.

That is why, on Wednesday, the National Bank of Poland became the latest to join a club of middleincome countries, alongside Hungary, Russia, Mexico, Colombia and Brazil, that have already
started to raise rates. The increase was modest, raising rates from 0.1 per cent to 0.5 per cent, but it
was a prudent move. Central banks have less breathing room to wait and see whether price rises
and supply bottlenecks are temporary.
For a start, inflation has increased even faster in middle-income countries than it has in rich ones.
The Polish rate was 5.8 per cent in September — the highest for 20 years. It is closer to double
figures in Brazil and in Mexico the core inflation rate accelerated to the fastest rate since 2017 in
September. These higher rates of inflation are partly because food accounts for a larger proportion
of consumption and therefore inflation baskets than in richer countries. Food prices increased 40
per cent over the previous 15 months according to the UN’s Food and Agriculture Organization, the
biggest increase since the Arab Spring in 2011.
The IMF in a chapter of its World Economic Outlook dedicated to inflation, published before the
group’s annual meetings next week, forecasts that inflation rates will peak at 6.8 per cent in
emerging and developed economies before falling to about 4 per cent next year. In contrast,
advanced economies are likely to see more modest inflation: peaking at 3.6 per cent this autumn,
before falling to 2 per cent.
While higher interest rates can do little to stop food from getting more expensive, central banks are
less trusted in emerging economies and have to work harder to keep expectations of price rises
under control. Periods of high inflation are, frequently, not cautionary tales but fresh memories,
especially in Latin America. In Turkey, president Recep Tayyip Erdogan advocates the unorthodox
view that higher interest rates cause price rises rather than quelling them. He fired the last central
bank chief who tried to raise rates. With the central bank undermined and still cutting rates,
inflation has reached almost 20 per cent.

It is smart, too, to get ahead of the rich countries. When the Federal Reserve, the US central bank,
began tapering its quantitative easing program in 2013, capital rushed out of emerging market
economies and exchange rates depreciated. Higher domestic rates protect against such an
eventuality. Indeed, the IMF points out that persistently high rates of inflation are associated with
fiscal deficits in rich countries. In poorer ones they are similarly correlated with large current
account deficits — depreciating currencies raise import costs.
Less space to support economies through fiscal and monetary stimulus is one reason why the
economic recoveries in emerging markets and richer countries are likely to diverge further. This is
due not only to the uneven rollout of coronavirus vaccines, but also to a slowing China, providing
less demand for commodities, as well as a retreat of the globalisation that has lifted millions out of
poverty. When officials from the IMF, the World Bank and elsewhere gather in Washington next
week, the focus must be on how to deliver a truly global recovery.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
The editorial board
The FT View
Global Economy
Central banks
European economy

