FT PROFESSIONAL

FirstFT World

FirstFT: Federal Reserve could start to limit stimulus as soon as this year, says Daly
US urges Opec to boost production, Afghanistan replaces army chief and China’s five-year plan

San Francisco Fed president Mary Daly has expressed confidence that the recovery in household and business activity would
continue to gather momentum © REUTERS

Yasemin Craggs Mersinoglu, Jennifer Creery and Sarah Andersen
Published AUG 11 2021 | Updated AUG 12 2021, 05:46

Good morning. This article is an on-site version of our FirstFT newsletter. Sign up to
our Asia, Europe/Africa or Americas edition to get it sent straight to your inbox every weekday
morning

The Federal Reserve could start “dialling back” its pandemic levels of monetary support for the US
economy by the end of the year given the strength of the economic rebound, according to a top
official at the US central bank.

In an interview with the Financial Times, Mary Daly, president of the San Francisco Fed, expressed
confidence that the robust recovery in household and business activity would continue to gather
momentum as more people returned to work and consumer spending remained buoyant, setting
the stage for a policy pivot in the coming months.

“I remain very optimistic and positive about the [autumn] and ongoing improvements in the key
variables we care about,” she said yesterday. “That for me means it’s appropriate to start discussing
dialling back the level of accommodation that we’re giving the economy on a regular basis, and the
starting point for that is of course asset purchases.”
The Fed has said it would continue buying $120bn of agency mortgage-backed securities and
Treasuries each month until it achieved “substantial further progress” on its goals of 2 per cent
inflation on average and maximum employment.

Five more stories in the news
1. US calls on Opec to boost oil production The White House has urged Opec to increase oil
output in an effort to curb high petrol prices that Biden administration officials say “risk harming
the ongoing global recovery”. The intervention marked a shift from last year, when Donald Trump
pressed Opec to raise prices to help US shale companies weather one of the worst market
downturns in decades.
2. Afghanistan replaces army chief The Afghan government has replaced its army chief for
the third time in just over a year, highlighting the disarray in the country as the Taliban sweeps
aside the government’s security forces. As the US prepares to withdraw the last of its troops, the
Islamist rebels have captured nine provincial capitals and seized control of Kunduz airport.

3. China unveils five-year plan China has released a five-year plan to strengthen regulatory
control over strategic sectors including technology and healthcare in Beijing’s latest push to assert
Communist party supremacy over the world’s second-largest economy.
4. US inflation pace steadies The rapid pace of consumer price increases steadied at a 13-year
high in July, with a 5.4 per cent rise from a year ago, as inflationary pressures persisted because of
supply-chain constraints and soaring demand.

Opinion: At what point on the inflationary spectrum is economic
officialdom playing with fire? It’s the most important question in macro,
writes Claire Jones.

5. Germany arrests Briton on suspicion of spying for Russia A British man working at the
UK embassy in Berlin was arrested on suspicion of passing information to Russian intelligence
services. The suspect, a local employee, rather than a diplomat, had been tracked for months before
his arrest.

Coronavirus digest
The New York Stock Exchange will require evidence of a full Covid-19
vaccination for anyone wishing to access the trading floor.
The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has
recommended Covid-19 vaccinations for pregnant women, saying that data
indicated the Moderna and Pfizer shots did not increase the risk of a
miscarriage.
The World Health Organization is to test three new drugs in
hospitalised Covid-19 patients, as part of a global drive for coronavirus
treatments among pre-existing medicines.
Europe’s motley crew of Covid passport protesters have found unity in
liberty.
New Zealand will gradually reopen its international border next year.
Several crucial industries and the healthcare sector face severe skills
shortages.
From lockdowns and high infection rates to enthusiasm for the jabs, Ireland has gone from a
pandemic hotspot to a vaccine poster child, writes Laura Noonan. Sign up for our Coronavirus
Business Update newsletter and follow our live blog for the latest.

The day ahead
Earnings Walt Disney, Airbnb and DoorDash report earnings. Read the full list here.
Zambia presidential election The southern African nation is braced for a tight race that will
test the health of democracy and could further delay talks on a vital IMF bailout. President Edgar
Lungu sent the army on to the streets ahead of today’s poll.

What else we’re reading
Delta variant drives US employers to mandate vaccines Fear of a backlash from employees
who distrust Covid-19 vaccines, or question an employer’s right to impose them, had made most
US companies reluctant. But in the past two weeks, vaccine mandates have gone from a rarity to a
priority on California tech campuses and at the headquarters of Wall Street banks.
After Cuomo’s downfall, New York reconsiders its politicians In the wake of the
governor’s resignation, some New Yorkers are now wondering whether a political culture
dominated by hyper-aggressive men prone to scandal may be ready for something new.
Switzerland’s ‘Silicon Valley of smell’ The Covid-19 pandemic has changed how people want
themselves, their clothes and their homes to smell. On the outskirts of Geneva is proof of how
lucrative scent can be. The efforts of two companies that dominate the way the world smells are
exacting, almost Willy Wonka-like, writes Sam Jones.

A vegetarian steak is tested at the headquarters of Swiss group Firmenich, one of the world’s leading flavour manufacturers ©
Fabrice Coffrini/AFP/Getty

Why central bankers keep their cool over rising house prices Inflation-obsessed central
bankers are growing sympathetic to the plight of millions squeezed out of property markets by
soaring prices. But taking action is another matter. Read the fifth instalment of our global house
prices series.
Peru’s new finance minister confronts challenges “I’m a leftist who believes that reducing
inequality is absolutely fundamental and perfectly compatible with reasonable macroeconomic
management,” former World Bank economist Pedro Francke told the Financial Times. “The two
things can go hand in hand.”

Visual Arts
Six international art exhibitions Tyler Mitchell in New York, Rachel Kneebone in London and
Arthur Timothy in Accra — here are some shows to bookmark for late summer.

‘Riverside Scene’, 2021, by Tyler Mitchell, who looks back at his roots in the American South © Tyler Mitchell

Recommended newsletters for you
Due Diligence — Top stories from the world of corporate finance. Sign up here
Moral Money — Our unmissable newsletter on socially responsible business, sustainable
finance and more. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
World
Companies
FirstFT

Yasemin Craggs Mersinoglu

