FT PROFESSIONAL

Federal Reserve

Top Fed official sees no ‘compelling’ reason to wait for fresh rate rise
Debt-ceiling deal removes ‘big piece of uncertainty’ over US economy, says Loretta Mester

Loretta Mester: ‘We’re getting to the real hard part here of how we assess trade-offs’ © Bloomberg

Colby Smith in Washington
Published MAY 31 2023 | Updated MAY 31 2023, 13:27

A top official at the Federal Reserve said there was no “compelling” reason to wait before
implementing another interest rate rise should economic data confirm that more must be done to
bring US inflation under control.
In an interview with the Financial Times, Loretta Mester, president of the Cleveland Fed, pushed
back against recent suggestions from some policymakers who argued the US central bank should
forego a rate rise at its next meeting in June.

“I don’t really see a compelling reason to pause — meaning wait until you get more evidence to
decide what to do,” she said. “I would see more of a compelling case for bringing [rates] up . . . and
then holding for a while until you get less uncertain about where the economy is going.”
The agreement this weekend between the White House and Republican congressional leaders on
the US borrowing limit “relieve[s] a big piece of uncertainty about the economy”, she added. The
deal must still be approved by both chambers of Congress, with the first vote expected to take place
on Wednesday in the House of Representatives.
Mester’s comments come amid divisions among US policymakers over fresh rate rises, with some
officials hinting at a pause in June before restarting at a later date when the economic picture
becomes clearer. Meanwhile, others indicate the Fed may not need to tighten any further.
Philip Jefferson, the Fed governor who was recently tapped by the Biden administration to serve as
the central bank’s vice-chair, hinted on Wednesday that he could support skipping an increase next
month, emphasising that the full effects of tightening have not yet filtered through the economy.
He also warned that higher interest rates could “exacerbate stress” across the banking sector.
“A decision to hold our policy rate constant at a coming meeting should not be interpreted to mean
that we have reached the peak rate for this cycle,” he said in a speech. “Indeed, skipping a rate hike
at a coming meeting would allow the [Federal Open Market Committee] to see more data before
making decisions about the extent of additional policy firming.”
Patrick Harker, the Philadelphia Fed president who is a voting member on the FOMC this year,
also on Wednesday backed skipping a rate rise at the next meeting, saying the central bank should
remain ready to increase rates at a later date if necessary.
Mester on Tuesday argued the bank would always have to operate with some uncertainty over the
trajectory of the economy and said she thought the Fed should only pause when the risks of doing
too little were evenly balanced with doing too much.
The only reason for skipping a rate increase when it is clear more tightening is necessary would be
extreme market volatility or some other shock, Mester said, such as a possible US debt default.

Mester said she could still be swayed by incoming employment data due on Friday as well as the
next inflation report, which will be released just as US central bankers convene for their two-day
gathering starting June 13.
However, Mester, one of the more hawkish regional presidents, signalled she was disappointed at
the progress on containing price pressures so far.
“I just think that we may have to go further,” she said. “At this point, I don’t really necessarily see a
compelling reason that we wouldn’t want to take another small step to counter some of that really
embedded, stubborn inflationary pressure.”
Her comments mark the latest intervention in the tense debate among officials over whether the
Fed has squeezed the economy enough to bring inflation down. It has raised its benchmark rate by
more than 5 percentage points in a little over a year.
After the series of jumbo rate rises, the fed funds rate now hovers between 5 per cent and 5.25 per
cent. In March, most officials projected that level would mark the peak of the tightening campaign.
Mester, who will not become a voting member of the policy-setting FOMC until next year, said
rate-setting decisions would become more fraught in the future.
Several voting members of the FOMC have recently expressed their scepticism over the need for an
imminent pause.
However, chair Jay Powell recently hinted he supported a pause, pointing to the number of rate
rises the Fed has implemented. He has also argued the recent banking turmoil would tighten
financial conditions and in effect do some of the central bank’s job for it.
“We’re getting to the real hard part here of how we assess trade-offs,” Mester said. “Different
policymakers will have different views about how they are assessing things.”

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
US economy
US inflation
US interest rates
Federal Reserve

