FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Unhedged

Chart of the Week: The fashionably late Federal Reserve
Consequences of the Fed’s relative delay in cutting rates

HAKYUNG KIM

The Bank of England, the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan are expected to make their rate-setting decisions next week
© Financial Times

Hakyung Kim
Published DEC 13 2025

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
This article is an on-site version of our Unhedged: Chart of the Week newsletter. You sign up
here to get the newsletter delivered every Saturday, or explore all FT newsletters

© Alan Smith and Hakyung Kim

Good morning. Holiday season? Nah. It’s central bank rate-setting decision season. As markets
anticipated, the US Federal Reserve cut borrowing costs by a quarter point on Wednesday,
bringing the federal funds rate to a range of 3.5 per cent to 3.75 per cent. Next week,
announcements will follow from the Bank of England, the European Central Bank and the Bank of
Japan.
Since the start of the pandemic in March 2020, monetary policy across major central banks has
largely moved in step. The initial emergency rate cuts were mostly synchronous, and the Fed’s
subsequent tightening in 2022 was within months of its European counterparts. But the US central
bank was notably late to join the current easing cycle, particularly compared to many of its
emerging markets peers. Several central banks, including the ECB, have signalled they are nearly
done cutting. This leaves the Fed an outlier, along with the BoJ, which is grappling with persistent
above-target inflation, and Brazil’s central bank, which has reversed course to rate increases again
after easing too aggressively.
In short, the rate differential between the US and other countries is narrowing. The US had been a
higher-rate destination for capital; now its rates are becoming relatively less attractive.
According to Benjamin Shoesmith, senior economist at KPMG Economics, “The biggest spillover
from this depends on what the Fed does next year. But if it cuts aggressively in the second half of
next year under the new Fed chair, then the pull down in US rates would make other countries
more attractive investment destinations, which could create a form of capital movement away from
the US.”
This could weaken the dollar, making imports for US consumers more expensive but US exports
more competitive, as Trump has long desired. Tell us your outlook for 2026: unhedged@ft.com.

Good reads from Unhedged:
Hakyung: An ode to the greatest book

Rob: Who’s the investing GOAT?

FT Unhedged podcast
Can’t get enough of Unhedged? Listen to our
new podcast, for a 15-minute dive into the
latest markets news and financial headlines,
twice a week. Catch up on past editions of
the newsletter here.

Recommended newsletters for you
Due Diligence — Top stories from the world of corporate finance. Sign up here
The AI Shift — John Burn-Murdoch and Sarah O’Connor dive into how AI is transforming the
world of work. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Hakyung Kim
Unhedged
Global Economy
Central banks
Markets

