FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion UK business

Economic sorrows come in battalions
High inflation, rising energy cost and a weakening economy are now with us, and
the impending tax rise will make it worse

MARTIN WOLF

© James Ferguson

Martin Wolf
Published FEB 8 2022

The Bank of England is forecasting the weakest growth of real post-tax labour incomes in more
than 70 years, with a fall of 2 per cent this year and a further half a per cent in 2023. This
depressing outlook captures the challenges generated by sharply higher import prices and the risks
of more generalised inflation. Among leading high-income economies, the UK seems to be
particularly hard hit. Inflationary risks seem similar to those in the US. But the UK is also a large
net importer of energy, especially gas, as prices have exploded upwards. The government might
have hoped that the fading of the pandemic’s clouds would leave a sunlit economy. But, as is their
wont, events got in the way. The economy, the people and the government face hard times.

The Bank’s Monetary Policy Report, out last week, noted: “Global inflationary pressures have
continued to build significantly, largely driven by the sharp increases in energy prices and upward
impact of the imbalance between supply of and demand for tradeable goods on their prices. On a
UK-weighted basis, four-quarter world export price inflation, including energy, is expected to have
risen to around 11 per cent in 2021 Q4.” The UK cannot take back control from the world economy.
Remarkably, the US alone generated almost all of the increase in consumption of goods among the
group of seven leading economies last year. That then drove the supply bottlenecks.

The Bank forecasts peak inflation at 7¼ per cent in April, with three-quarters of the increase
between last December and April being due to rising energy and goods prices. But it has a still
bigger problem, which is similar to that of the US. The labour market is running hot.
Unemployment is already below its equilibrium rate, the Bank believes. Less speculatively,
companies report recruitment difficulties and high vacancies. On balance, concludes the report,
there is excess demand in the economy, which is not yet the situation in the eurozone.

What makes the situation more difficult is that higher prices of imports, especially energy, impose
an overall economic loss. As we learned in the 1970s, such losses must be absorbed. If people play a
game of pass the parcel, by insisting on higher wages and salaries in order to offset the reduced real
incomes, the outcomes would either be a squeeze on profits, which would damage investment, or
cause an inflationary spiral, which would damage almost everybody.

Andrew Bailey, the BoE governor, duly remarked last week that “we do need to see a moderation of
wage rises . . . in order to get through this problem more quickly.” This remark was certainly
unpopular and probably useless. But analytically he was right. The more wage earners seek to
restore their purchasing power in an economy hit by these externally imposed losses, the higher
will be inflation and the more merciless the needed monetary squeeze. Boris Johnson’s desire for a
high-wage, high-growth economy is irrelevant. The worry is that the monetary policy needed to
curb second-round inflationary risks will end up even more economically damaging than the Bank
and indeed almost anybody else now thinks.
Yet this is not just about monetary policy. Just as in the US, though in different ways, fiscal policy
is also relevant. This is so in two distinct ways. One is that only the government has the means to
cushion the badly hit against the losses imposed by higher prices, especially of energy. The second
and broader dimension is that the overall fiscal stance will bear on overall demand and so influence
what the Bank needs to do.

On the former, the government has introduced a broad package of measures, concentrated on
alleviating rising energy costs, with £9bn (0.4 per cent of gross domestic product) spent next year.
The measures consist of a £200 discount on all electricity bills from October, which would cost
£5.5bn. Yet this is to last just a year and subsequently must be repaid. If energy prices remain high,
many people are likely to struggle and even fall deeply into debt. A further £150 of support will go
to households in the bottom four council tax bands, at a cost of £3.5bn. According to the
Resolution Foundation, even after the £200 rebate, the annualised increase in energy prices (after
the jump in the price cap in April) will be 39 per cent.
This package is ill targeted. Much of the benefit will go to people who do not need the money and
significant numbers of poorer people will fail to receive it, partly because council tax is out of date,
being based on the 1991 value of properties. Overall, the burden on the poor will still remain the
heaviest because they spend the highest proportion of their incomes on energy. (See charts).

Meanwhile, the planned increase in national insurance contributions, supposedly to pay for
additional spending on health and social care, is set to go ahead. I have argued before that both the
tax itself and the social care policy it finances are indefensible. As important today is the fact that
this increase in taxation will be added to the impact of higher prices of energy and other goods and
services. An optimist might argue that this combination of hits to demand will at least allow
monetary tightening to be significantly smaller than it would otherwise have needed to be. A
pessimist might respond that such a multiple whammy will make workers even more determined
to recoup their lost real incomes via higher wages.
High inflation, sharp rises in energy costs and a weakening economy are now with us. The foolish
tax rise on the way will make it worse. The Bank forecasts growth of 1¼ per cent next year and 1
per cent in 2024. The government hoped for better. No such luck. Unhappy times are here again.
martin.wolf@ft.com

​Letter in response to this column:
Headlines should be ‘thoughtful, not unhinged’ / From Emilio Sacerdoti, Bethesda, MD, US

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Martin Wolf
UK energy
Global inflation
UK economy
UK inflation

