FT PROFESSIONAL

Chris Giles on Central Banks Central banks

Dovish Federal Reserve moves could make a frothy US market frothier
Cutting interest rates while equities are roaring raises financial stability risk

The US Federal Reserve’s decision to cut interest rates last week is expected to spur the already buoyant equity market further ©
SHAWN THEW/EPA/Shutterstock

Joel Suss
Published SEP 23 2025

This article is an on-site version of our Chris Giles on Central Banks newsletter. Premium
subscribers can sign up here to get the newsletter delivered every Tuesday. Standard
subscribers can upgrade to Premium here, or explore all FT newsletters

Hello from the newsroom in London. I’m Joel Suss, FT data journalist, standing in for Chris Giles
today.

Stephen Miran, the new US Federal Reserve governor currently on leave from Donald Trump’s
White House, argued that his decision to back a half-point cut at last week’s rate-setting meeting
was justified because the fed funds rate is “roughly 2 points too restrictive” and there hasn’t been
“any material inflation from tariffs”.
This does not seem to accord with the US’s loose financial conditions, above target and rising
inflation, and 4.3 per cent unemployment. What am I missing? Let me know: joel.suss@ft.com.

Frothy markets get frothier
The Fed is in a tricky spot. Leaving aside the menace to its independence, the central bank faces
stagflationary forces, with inflation and labour market indicators moving in opposite directions.
With CPI inflation rising over recent months — from a post-pandemic low of 2.33 per cent in April
to 2.94 per cent in August — last week’s cut could constitute a mistake that pushes inflation higher.
FT core — our in-house measure of underlying inflation — is also trending higher, driven in part by
the increasing proportion of items rising in price, which is now far above the long-run average.

The FT's measure of core CPI
inflation has settled above target

Drivers of FT core for US CPI show
inflation is not defeated

Annual rate of change (%)

Annual measures (%)
Average is from 2001-2019

All items

FT core
Weighted median

Prop
1

8

0.9

10

0.8
5
6

4

Average

0.7
0.6

0

0.5

Volatility

Excl.

8
2

Inflation target

10

6
4

0
2

5
Average

0
Source: FT calculations, BLS • FT core inflation is calculated using an ensemble model (methodolog
here)
FT graphic Joel Suss

And while the Fed still considers US interest rates to be in restrictive territory (though not nearly
as much as does Miran), financial conditions were already loose and loosening sharply ahead of
last week’s rate cut, thanks in large part to buoyant US equities.
Spurring on inflation is not the only concern. The Fed’s move last week is expected to egg on
equities further. And with stock valuations already signalling a potential bubble, financial stability
risk is rising.

US financial conditions are loose and Loose US financial conditions are
loosening, even though Fed rates are being driven by a buoyant stock
considered ‘moderately’ restrictive
market
Contributions to GDP growth over the next year
(% points). Negative values mean financial
conditions are expected to boost GDP growth in
the year ahead, and vice versa

Contributions to financial condition index by
category
Solid line is annual headline inflation (%)
FCI
FFR
Mortgage rate
House prices

10-year Treasury
BBB
Stock market
Dollar

2

↑ Headwinds
1

to GDP
growth

2

1

↑

Headwinds
to GDP
growth

0
0
-1

↓ Tailwinds to
GDP growth

-1

↓ Tailwinds
to GDP

Source: Federal Reserv
FT graphic: Joel Suss

With the S&P 500 back at record highs after Trump’s “liberation day” shock, a frothy market may
soon get frothier. Is it a bubble and, if so, when will it burst? These are questions only answerable
with hindsight. But what is clear is that the Magnificent Seven megacap tech stocks are driving the
market higher. Meanwhile, price-to-earnings ratios are near dotcom levels, according to the BIS.
And the revolutionary promise of artificial intelligence seems premature.

Gary Marcus, prominent AI scientist and critic, has for some time been warning that current
technology is reaching fundamental limits that fall well short of promised superintelligence. Even
Meta chief executive Mark Zuckerberg concurred in a recent podcast appearance. He said an AI
bubble akin to dotcom was “quite possible”, although that would mean opportunities to acquire
cheap distressed assets, he added.
A clearer sign of rising financial froth is in listed crypto hoarding companies, many of which
purchase bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies via equity and debt from already highly leveraged
hedge funds. Lots of these companies’ share prices have now fallen below the market value of their
crypto holdings (their answer to which is often to take on more debt).
How worried should we be? In its April financial stability report, the Fed highlighted the country’s
healthy household and bank balance sheets. This is certainly not the US before the global financial
crisis. But the fallout from a burst tech or crypto bubble could still cause widespread damage. This
is especially true when considering that a lot of risk sits opaquely outside, but interconnected with,
the traditional financial system, in the form of highly leveraged “business development
corporations” and other private credit vehicles.

'Business development corporation' leverage has been rising
Debt-to-equity
100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%
2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

2024
Source: B

Regulatory independence
Another under-appreciated risk to financial stability has grown in plain sight. Much has been said
since Trump’s re-election about threats to Fed independence, but the concerns have mainly
revolved around monetary policy and the risk of rampant inflation.
Threats to Fed regulatory and supervisory independence also present clear risks.
World Bank and Bank of England academics developed a regulatory independence index that
assesses countries based on variables such as laws around removal and tenure of the regulatory
agency head and autonomy in technical rule-setting for banks.
Unsurprisingly, regulatory independence correlates with financial stability, with banks having
substantially fewer non-performing loans when independence is high.

While the Fed is fighting hard to keep its monetary policy independence, it has arguably acquiesced
to Trump on the regulatory front. Just before the US president’s inauguration, Michael Barr
announced he would resign as Fed vice-chair for supervision owing to “risk of a dispute over the
position” (although he remains on the Fed board of governors).
Michelle Bowman, Trump’s pick as Barr’s successor, has promised a more “pragmatic” approach to
supervision. Let’s hope the pragmatism does not trade off financial stability for lower Trump
dispute risk.

What I’ve been reading and listening to
The Swiss National Bank is unlike its peers and more akin to a sovereign
wealth fund. It has large holdings of US equities, including $42bn invested
in five American tech giants.
If the sources of financial instability discussed above weren’t enough, the
European Central Bank has a new working paper that finds experiences of
high inflation lead to higher chances of financial crises.
Economist Edward Yardeni writes that tensions between the Fed’s
employment and inflation objectives underline why the central bank’s dual
mandate should be repealed in favour of its original 1913 goal to maintain
financial stability.
Martha Gimbel of the Yale Budget Lab speaks to Claire Jones about the
history of tariffs in the US and whether the revenues they raise outweigh
their negative economic impact.

A chart that matters
Trump’s “liberation day” tariff announcement was a major negative economic sentiment shock, as
clearly seen in the FT Monetary Policy Radar’s macro mood index. How did the market recover so
quickly?

The BIS’s latest quarterly review does some nifty work to decompose changes in the S&P 500 and
Vix indices. In short, “adverse effects appear to have been dominated by non-tariff-related news
triggering renewed optimism in risky asset markets”, with retail investors having been net buyers
over the period, in contrast to institutional investors.

Negative tariff effects have been dominated by positive non-tariff news
Deviation around trend (log points)
Data

Tariff shocks

Other shocks

10
0

Vix
'Liberation
day'
China-US
truce

S&P 500

-10
Mar 23 2025 May 25 2025 Jul 27 2025

100
50
0
Mar 23 2025 May 25 2025 Jul 27 2025
Source: BIS
FT graphic: Joel Sus

Central Banks is edited by Harvey Nriapia

Recommended newsletters for you
Free Lunch — Your guide to the global economic policy debate. Sign up here
The Lex Newsletter — Lex, our investment column, breaks down the week’s key themes, with
analysis by award-winning writers. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
Central banks
Federal Reserve
Chris Giles on Central Banks
Joel Suss

