FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Unhedged

Is Jay Powell lucky or good?
Policy, happenstance and the soft landing

ROBERT ARMSTRONG

© Reuters

Robert Armstrong and Aiden Reiter
Published SEP 3 2024

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
This article is an on-site version of our Unhedged newsletter. Premium subscribers can sign up
here to get the newsletter delivered every weekday. Standard subscribers can upgrade to
Premium here, or explore all FT newsletters

US inflation is close to target, the unemployment rate is 4.3 per cent, and the economy is growing
above its trend rate. Bad news can always appear — the August employment report is on Friday —
but it looks like Jay Powell’s Federal Reserve has managed the economy about as well as one can
imagine.
After 20 years of thinking about markets, however, I see the influence of luck everywhere. It is fair
to wonder if Powell, rather than being a historically brilliant Fed chair, has just had the good
fortune to be in charge when good things happened. Last week, my colleague Martin Sandbu
articulated this possibility very neatly.
In his Jackson Hole speech, Powell attributed the post-pandemic inflation to distortions of both
supply and demand, and put the subsequent disinflation down to the dissipation of those shocks,
monetary policy moderating demand, and well-anchored inflation expectations. Anchored
expectations were particularly important, he said, and the Fed’s vigilance in both current and past
cycles has contributed to that.
Sandbu’s point is that if Powell dropped monetary policy from his disinflation explanation, the
explanation would still work. Did monetary policy cool the labour market by reducing aggregate
demand? Well, demand hasn’t weakened much, and the cooler labour market could be explained
by the end of pandemic disruptions alone. Did the sharp increase in interest rates keep inflation
expectations anchored, by moderating the behaviour of people who negotiate for wages and set
prices? Well, market measures of expectations stabilised in the spring of 2021, before rate policy
tightened.
I put this basic challenge — was Powell lucky, or good? — to four economists, and received an
interesting range of responses. Paul Ashworth of Capital Economics thinks policy did cool demand
but circumstances, particularly immigration, were more important:

I think the dropback in inflation was more due to easing supply shortages,
particularly the immigration-led rebound in labour supply, rather than a
weakening in demand that would be attributable to tighter monetary policy.
But that doesn’t necessarily make Powell ‘lucky’ . . . weaker demand did play
some role that the Fed can take the credit for.
Powell also pushes the line in his Jackson Hole speech that ‘prompt’ Fed
hikes were, additionally, important because they kept inflation expectations
well anchored. I’m less convinced by that supposed channel.
Jason Furman of Harvard is less sceptical about the anchoring effect, and notes that demand did
cool in key sectors:

The soft landing would never have happened without the extraordinary
tightening of monetary policy. Most importantly the Fed kept inflation
expectations anchored by showing it was willing to act as aggressively as
needed. In addition, the Fed reduced demand in certain sectors, especially
construction, which ensured that as the fiscal stimulus and supply shocks
faded there would not be another round of inflationary pressures.
Don Rissmiller of Strategas also emphasises the possibility of resurgent inflation:

We’re not quite at 2 per cent inflation. Maybe we’re close enough (I would
argue we are) but there has been a lot of research on how the first part of the
adjustment is easy and the ‘last mile’ is hard. So one reason [the economy]
looks good is we haven’t actually finished the race . . .

In the 1970s [inflation ebbed as shocks subsided] as well. Inflation came
down three times . . . the problem is it just went right back up three times
(and accelerated).
Rissmiller thinks some credit for the lack of a resurgence goes to the Fed, for keeping expectations
anchored with aggressive rate increases. But he thinks that there was also some luck involved in
the soft landing. Immigration helped cool the labour market, for one thing. For another, the Fed
was able to slow and then pause raising rates in part because there was a mini-financial crisis that
was bad enough to scare everybody, but not bad enough to trigger a recession: the Silicon Valley
Bank failure. “That looks more like luck than a plan,” Rissmiller says.
Adam Posen, president of the Peterson Institute, thinks that if the Fed had not increased rates,
expectations would likely have become unanchored and inflation would have taken longer to come
down. The long period of low inflation preceding the pandemic helped anchor expectations, too, as
did parallel action by central banks globally. The surprising piece of good fortune was how little
damage those rate increases did to the economy:

This occurred partly because the financial system and household and
business balance sheets were so solid in 2019, and for the most part
improved during Covid, which nobody foresaw.
This occurred partly because the neutral real interest rate went up for a
variety of reasons during Covid, which I expect to persist. Therefore, the
given policy was not as tight as the Fed and others thought it was, as seen in
the loose credit conditions.
So, the Fed definitely did not cause the soft landing. Remember, chair
Powell’s 2022 Jackson Hole speech was about readiness to inflict pain, and
everyone pretty much expected that pain to come (myself included).

Posen, like the others, thinks the added labour supply from immigration helped, but he adds
another positive shock to supply, from higher productivity:

What caused the soft landing was two unforeseen positive supply shocks
since the start of 2022: a large surge in immigration, expanding the labour
force and reducing labour costs; a rise in productivity growth above the preCovid trend.
No one saw either of these coming, and the Fed had absolutely zero influence
on either of them. I would argue that the productivity growth increase was
due to the reallocation of US workers to better/larger/more productive
employers following the mass unemployment due to the Covid epidemic in
the first half of 2020.
On balance, the soft landing would not have been possible without a lot of luck. Pandemic
disruptions faded. A surge in immigration helped loosen the labour market. An unexpected
productivity increase helped too. The SVB mini-crisis prompted a slowing of rate increases at what
turned out the be just the right time. And a higher neutral interest rate meant that rates were never
as tight as they appeared — meaning less economic damage for the same signalling of serious
intent from the Fed. And in the background, a long period of disinflation and central bank vigilance
before Covid made it more likely that inflation expectations would not run wild.
That said, Sandbu’s point that expectations were stable even before policy began to tighten is well
taken, but not dispositive. By the time the Fed started to increase rates, many observers were
howling that the central bank was “behind the curve”. Aggressive action thereafter calmed fears; so
credit goes to the Fed there. Sandbu is right that we can’t be sure about this, but the basic picture
makes sense.

One good read
More aid, please.

Email us: robert.armstrong@ft.com and aiden.reiter@ft.com.

FT Unhedged podcast
Can’t get enough of Unhedged? Listen to our
new podcast, for a 15-minute dive into the
latest markets news and financial headlines,
twice a week. Catch up on past editions of
the newsletter here.

Recommended newsletters for you
Due Diligence — Top stories from the world of corporate finance. Sign up here
Chris Giles on Central Banks — Vital news and views on what central banks are thinking,
inflation, interest rates and money. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Robert Armstrong
Unhedged
US economy
US inflation
US interest rates

