FT PROFESSIONAL

Federal Reserve

Federal Reserve cuts US growth forecast as Trump’s policies weigh on outlook
Central bank also lifts inflation projection as chair Jay Powell warns of tariff impact
Claire Jones in Washington and Harriet Clarfelt in New York
Published MAR 19 2025 | Updated MAR 19 2025, 23:49

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel

RESUME

You may have seen that um
Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell acknowledged the importance of tariffs for inflation © Reuters
The Federal Reserve has slashed its US growth forecast and lifted its inflation outlook,
underscoring concerns that Donald Trump’s tariffs will knock the world’s biggest economy.
The Fed’s latest projections showed officials expected GDP to expand by 1.7 per cent this year, with
prices forecast to rise by 2.7 per cent. Policymakers kept the central bank’s main interest rate on
hold at the end of a two-day meeting on Wednesday.

Fed chair Jay Powell acknowledged to reporters after the meeting that Trump’s plans to impose
sweeping tariffs on US trading partners had affected the central bank’s outlook for inflation and the
economy.
“Clearly some of it, a good part of it”, is related to the impact of the president’s tariffs, Powell said,
adding that such measures “tend to bring growth down and push inflation up”. He also said the Fed
did “not need to be in a hurry” to shift rates given “unusually elevated” uncertainty.
Progress on inflation was “probably delayed for the time being”, Powell added. The Fed has been
battling to push inflation back to its 2 per cent goal and halt the most severe bout of price pressures
in decades.
In a post on his Truth Social platform late on Wednesday, Trump renewed his pressure on the
central bank, calling for the Fed to reduce borrowing costs to offset new tariffs he plans to unveil
next month.
“The Fed would be MUCH better off CUTTING RATES as US Tariffs start to transition (ease!) their
way into the economy,” the president wrote. “Do the right thing.”

US Fed officials now project slower growth and higher inflation
Median projections by the FOMC for 2025, from each meeting since March 2023

Change in real GDP
2%

1%

The Fed also announced it was slowing down the pace of its quantitative tightening programme,
lowering the amount of US Treasury debt it allows to roll off its balance sheet each month from
$25bn to $5bn beginning in April.
US equities hit daily highs following the Fed decision, with the S&P 500 rising 1.1 per cent and the
tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite gaining 1.4 per cent.
US government debt also rallied, pushing the benchmark 10-year Treasury yield down 0.04
percentage points to 4.25 per cent.
Ed Al-Hussainy at Columbia Threadneedle Investments said: “The good news for risk is that the
Fed expects higher inflation but not high enough to change their pace of rate cuts.”
The new projections marked a significant shift from December, when officials on the Federal Open
Market Committee, the central bank’s policy-setting panel, forecast 2.1 per cent growth for 2025
and estimated the closely watched personal consumption expenditures inflation gauge would end
the year at 2.5 per cent.

US Fed officials signal gradual pace of cuts
Each dot represents one FOMC participant's projection for the midpoint of US interest rates (%) from
every meeting since June 2024
Mar 2025

Dec 2024

Sep 2024

Jun 2024

5

Current rate
Current
rate
4

3

2

1

0

2025

2026

2027

Longer run

Source: Federal Reserve
FT graphic: Oliver Roeder

The meeting came at a crucial time for the US economy as Trump has pledged deep reductions to
federal spending and broad tax cuts. He has also imposed steep new tariffs on imports, sparking a
global trade war.
Surveys have shown US consumers and businesses are fretting over the levies, which have
depressed demand and increased price pressures.

The Fed’s new forecasts “signalled essentially that we are in a stagflation economy, with lower
growth and higher inflation”, said Torsten Slok, chief economist at investment group Apollo.

“On the one hand, stagflation is a very complex challenge for the Fed. Should they listen to growth,
meaning they should cut rates, or should they listen to higher inflation, meaning they should be
hiking rates?”
An FOMC statement on Wednesday, made after US rate-setters maintained the target range for the
benchmark federal funds rate between 4.25 per cent and 4.5 per cent, said: “Uncertainty around
the economic outlook has increased.”
The latest so-called dot plot projections show Fed officials broadly expect one or two more quarterpoint rate cuts this year — the same as in December — after lowering rates by a percentage point in
2024. However, four FOMC members now expect no cuts at all this year, against one in December.
Investors are expecting two to three quarter-point cuts by the end of 2025.
Fed governor Christopher Waller voted against the decision to slow quantitative tightening, saying
the current decline of $25bn a month remained appropriate.
All of the voting FOMC members backed the decision to keep rates on hold.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US economy
US inflation
US interest rates
US equities
Central banks

