FT PROFESSIONAL

US inflation

US consumer prices rise sharply despite Federal Reserve rate increases
Persistence of high inflation triggers see-saw session on Wall Street as investors weigh tougher monetary
response

The consumer price index’s core measure of inflation, which strips out volatile energy and food costs, rose 6.6% on an annual basis
last month © David Paul Morris/Bloomberg

James Politi and Lauren Fedor in Washington and Kate Duguid in New York
Published OCT 13 2022 | Updated OCT 13 2022, 16:58

The rapid rise in US consumer prices showed no signs of abating in September, prompting a seesaw trading session on Wall Street, as investors weighed whether the Federal Reserve will have to
become even more aggressive to slow rampant inflation.
The consumer price index’s core measure of inflation, which strips out volatile energy and food
costs, rose 6.6 per cent on an annual basis last month, faster than the 6.3 per cent rate in August —
and its fastest pace in four decades.

The increase in the overall CPI last month, including energy and food, rose 8.2 per cent over a year
earlier, little changed from the 8.3 per cent annual rise recorded in August.
Compared with the previous month, overall CPI rose 0.4 per cent while the core measure increased
0.6 per cent.
The S&P 500 dropped 2.4 per cent shortly after Wall Street’s opening bell on Thursday; before
markets opened, the futures market had indicated a 1.3 per cent gain. However, stocks staged a
dramatic turnround and closed 2.6 per cent higher. The Nasdaq Composite ended 2.2 per cent
higher, recovering from a decline of about 3.2 per cent.
The yield on two-year Treasuries, which is sensitive to changes in monetary policy expectations,
surged 0.24 percentage points to 4.53 per cent, its highest level since mid-2007, before dropping
back to be up 0.18 percentage points up on the day.
Jamie Dimon, chief executive of JPMorgan Chase, said that while he could not predict whether
tougher monetary policy would plunge the US economy into a deep recession, the failure of
markets to sell off more sharply was an indication investors still believed a “mild recession” was
possible.
“My point, in the tough recession, you would expect the market to go down around another 20 or
30 per cent,” Dimon said on Thursday at the Institute of International Finance annual membership
meeting.
Dimon noted that consumer spending was still much higher than before the Covid-19 pandemic,
adding that consumers “could probably do that for another nine months before inflation and
spending catches up with them. Which is why I think you’re going to see a strong economy for a
while.”
Investors and economists had been looking for signs that the Fed might start to slow the pace of its
interest rate rises from the 0.75 percentage point increases it has announced at each of its past
three meetings. But the CPI data released on Thursday suggest such a move is not yet on the
immediate horizon.

Following the report, traders in the futures market priced in a 98 per cent chance that the Fed
would lift interest rates by 0.75 percentage points in November, compared with 84 per cent on
Wednesday.
Kathy Bostjancic, chief US financial economist at Oxford Economics, said consumer inflation
remained “stubbornly elevated” due to “a continued broad-based surge” in prices for core services.
“High inflation readings will keep the Fed in an aggressive tightening mode and on course for at
least another 125 basis points this year,” she wrote in a note.
The futures market now expects the fed funds rate to reach 4.94 per cent by May 2023, up from
4.65 per cent the previous day. The central bank’s policy rate is in a target range of 3 per cent to
3.25 per cent.

One of the most troubling features of the CPI report was that housing costs — described as
“shelter” in the data — rose 0.7 per cent in September, as much as they had the previous month,
and were up 6.6 per cent on an annual basis.

The persistence of high inflation has been a huge political challenge for the White House and
congressional Democrats, overshadowing a swift recovery out of the pandemic with millions of jobs
created since Joe Biden took office as president.
In a statement on Thursday, Biden acknowledged that Americans were “squeezed by the cost of
living” and said there was “more work” to do to fight inflation even though some “progress” had
been made. He said that if Republicans take control of Congress in November’s midterm elections,
“everyday costs will go up, not down”.
Republicans have made rising prices a central part of their message to voters, blaming the Biden
administration and tying the rise to the Democrat-led stimulus enacted by the president in March
2021 that injected $1.9tn into the US economy.
On Wednesday, several Republican lawmakers and candidates jumped on new figures showing that
the producer price index, a measure of wholesale prices for businesses, rose faster than expected in
September.
Rick Scott, the Republican senator from Florida who chairs the National Republican Senatorial
Committee, said inflation was an “unbearable kick for families trying to get back on their feet” in
his home state in the wake of Hurricane Ian.
US consumers have received some relief from the fall in petrol prices that occurred over the
summer: the peak of inflation under Biden so far came in June, when CPI rose 9.1 per cent on an
annual basis. But the administration and Fed officials would have liked to have seen the price
increases fade more rapidly than they have.
Additional reporting by Joshua Franklin in New York

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article

US economy
US politics & policy
US inflation
US
James Politi

