FT PROFESSIONAL

Year in a Word 2021
Opinion US inflation

Year in a word: Transitory
As inflation accelerated to record levels, analysts predicting it would be shortlived
appeared out of step

MARTIN SANDBU

Inflationary pressures across the world rose, wrongfooting many analysts. Jay Powell of the Federal Reserve popularised the claim
that these were transitory © FT montage/Bloomberg

Martin Sandbu
Published DEC 23 2021

(adj) — not permanent, liable to disappear by itself
Commentators and observers who, ever since the global financial crisis, have been incessantly
predicting that inflation would take off, were often dismissed as cranks; but whether by luck or
good judgement, they were on target in 2021.

It was altogether different when Democrat-sympathising economists began warning, just months
into Joe Biden’s administration, that the new president’s stimulus package was more than the
economy could bear without worrying inflationary pressures.
This friendly fire — from luminaries such as Lawrence Summers and Olivier Blanchard, the former
US Treasury secretary and IMF chief economist, respectively — was initially dismissed by most
Biden supporters. But over the course of 2021, more and more members of Team Transitory have
conceded that inflationary pressures are stronger than they had thought. In the US and many other
countries, inflation is now at the highest level it has been for decades.
Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell popularised the claim that inflation was “transitory” because it
was driven by factors likely to abate by themselves, such as pandemic-related supply chain
bottlenecks, steep energy price rises, and a big shift in consumption from services to goods. His
critics, however, fear that as wages respond to inflation, a wage-price spiral could permanently lift
the rate of price growth.
As inflation kept accelerating, “transitory” started to become an embarrassment. Powell has
insisted his use of the term never meant “shortlived”, but in the end decided to retire the phrase.
He and the other major central banks have, however, stuck by their analysis — if not the word —
and expect inflation to come down by the second half of 2022.
martin.sandbu@ft.com

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Martin Sandbu
US inflation
Covid-19
Jerome H. Powell

