FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion US inflation

Post-pandemic inflation fears are overblown
There are bigger long-term forces at work — technology, real estate and the future
of work

RANA FOROOHAR

© Matt Kenyon

Rana Foroohar
Published JUL 18 2021

Too much in our market system revolves around the short term. That certainly holds true for the
debate about inflation. Last week’s data showed US prices rising at their fastest pace in 13 years.
That has led everyone from top investors to restaurant and hotel owners, who are now finding that
they may have to pay more for previously low wage service staff, to fret about an overheating
economy.

But the hand-wringing is premature. These early signs of rising prices are more reflective of a
predictable, post-lockdown surge in animal spirits than any longer term trend. Supply chain
bottlenecks will soon ease, as they did in 2020 with, say, personal protective equipment. Purchases
of cars and vacations will subside as the post-pandemic spending splurge passes. And waiters
commanding high salaries today may be replaced by automated systems tomorrow: just notice how
many summer travellers already tap their pre-flight cocktail orders into an iPad.
What we aren’t talking enough about — and what will surely prove far more significant and harder
to predict — is how technology, changing demographics, and their combined effect on real estate,
will affect secular trends in inflation. This is what really matters for workers, companies and asset
prices.
Consider first the change in how and where Americans want to live and work. Some of the cheaper
parts of the southern and western US have seen an influx of people who used to live in expensive
coastal cities but are no longer tethered to their offices. But this is still a nascent shift. Most of the
people leaving pricey New York or Bay Area apartments are relocating to slightly cheaper adjacent
metro areas, or nearby suburban and rural areas — not to the US interior.
It’s anyone’s guess how long these shifts will last. If bankrupt cities can’t fix public services or
education, some urbanites — especially those with children — may leave cities permanently. But
others are already moving back now they can go maskless to the theatre or a favourite restaurant.
Either way, this “migration mania” has led to a 24 per cent year-on-year rise in home prices. Before
the pandemic, housing inflation as measured in rents and rent-equivalents accounted for the lion
share of US inflation. As Daniel Alpert of Westwood Capital notes: “While home prices could fall if
inflation persists and interest rates rise, eventually the higher prices paid for homes from mid2020 on will be reflected in rents and rent equivalents.” This, as he told me, would “backfill” any
decline in the price of other goods and services.
The Fed has told us not to worry about inflation: things will calm down in six months or so, when
stimulus payments are tapped out and the summer surge is over. But another surge may be
beginning, as retiring baby boomers holding $35tn in assets start giving money to their children.

Some believe this will have a profoundly inflationary effect, to the extent that it’s money coming
out of financial markets and into real economy spending — be that on homes, cars, healthcare or
education. Others think this wealth transfer will be an inflation non-issue: longer boomer lifespans
will eat up more retirement savings, and most of what’s left will go to the wealthiest who can only
consume so much.
What, if anything, could dampen inflation over the longer term? One way is if more workers
produce more goods and services for people to consume. Without that, you have greater demand
than supply, so inflation rises. Those jobs must also pay sufficiently well to support consumption.
This leads us to one of the trickiest long-term trends of all: the future of work. The pandemic has
sped up the digitalisation of everything. I think that’s going to create a major disinflationary force
in the global economy.
Corporate investment in “intangible” goods such as intellectual property and software rose sharply
during the pandemic. An executive survey last year by McKinsey, the consultancy, found that three
quarters of respondents in North America and Europe expected to accelerate such investments
over the next four years. That is up from 55 per cent between 2014 and 2019.
These kinds of investments increase productivity but at the cost of jobs, and fewer jobs translates
into less demand. Combined with digitisation, this could drive down the prices of goods, plus
services such as healthcare and education. Alongside housing, these services are generally the most
inflation-generating categories among OECD countries, including the US.
Such technology-driven productivity would therefore be deflationary. So too if there were more
workers able to leverage these new technologies in their work. Ideally, government investment in
reskilling will do just that. By converting low paid care work into higher skilled middle income
jobs, consumption could rise even as prices might fall in sectors such as healthcare. Demand for
that is rising sharply as boomers age, yet the jobs currently on offer are neither productive nor well
paid.

Such investment in the “caring economy” is the focus of much of Joe Biden’s administration’s
proposed stimulus. Let’s hope it gets through. Otherwise, if nothing changes, we may see more
digitalised businesses employing only a few highly paid people — and the cost of consuming the
goods and services that constitute middle class living will continue to rise.
rana.foroohar@ft.com
​Letter in response to this column:
An overheating economy looks inescapable for US / From Desmond Lachman, American
Enterprise Institute, Washington, DC, US

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Rana Foroohar
Demographics and population
US inflation
Covid-19

