FT PROFESSIONAL

US interest rates

Donald Trump tells Jay Powell Fed is making a ‘mistake’ by not cutting US interest rates
Central bank chair meets president at White House to discuss economic expectations

The talks between Donald Trump, left, and Jay Powell follow pressure from the US president on the Fed chair to lower interest rates ©
Carlos Barria/Reuters

James Politi in Washington
Published MAY 29 2025 | Updated MAY 29 2025, 15:26

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
Donald Trump told the head of the Federal Reserve that he was making a “mistake” by not
loosening US monetary policy, in their first meeting of Trump’s second term.
Fed chair Jay Powell had been invited by the president to the White House on Thursday to discuss,
according to the US central bank, “economic developments including for growth, employment and
inflation”.

The talks follow pressure from the president on the Fed chair to lower interest rates in order to
blunt the impact of the administration’s trade policies.
Following the private meeting, White House press secretary Karoline Leavitt said Trump told
Powell he believed the Fed chair was “making a mistake by not lowering interest rates, which is
putting us at an economic disadvantage to China and other countries”.

PLAY | 00:23

White House press secretary Karoline Leavitt says Trump privately met with Powell © Reuters
According to the Fed, Powell “did not discuss his expectations for monetary policy, except to stress
that the path of policy will depend entirely on incoming economic information and what that
means for the outlook”.
The central bank said in a statement following Thursday’s meeting that Powell told Trump that the
chair and his colleagues on the Fed’s interest rate-setting committee “will set monetary policy, as
required by law, to support maximum employment and stable prices and will make those decisions
based solely on careful, objective and non-political analysis”.
Trump has in the past considered removing Powell from his post before his term ends in May 2026
— a possibility that has unnerved markets by calling into question the Fed’s independence.

But the president last month said he had “no intention of firing [Powell]” in comments that
soothed investors. The Fed has kept its main interest rate steady with a target range between 4.25
per cent and 4.5 per cent since Trump took office for a second time in January.
Following an escalation in the Trump administration’s attacks on Harvard University, Powell used
a commencement address at Princeton on Sunday to call on students to protect democracy and
described American universities as a “crucial national asset”.
US central bank officials have warned that Trump’s policies risked delivering both slower growth
and higher inflation, but have indicated that they had time to analyse the effect of the measures on
the economy before making any new moves on monetary policy.
If the prevailing impact of Trump’s policies were to speed up inflation, it would argue for keeping
interest rates higher for longer, whereas if there was an adverse shock to employment, it would
argue for lower interest rates. But the labour market has remained relatively strong while inflation
has been steady.
Additional reporting by Lauren Fedor

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US economy
US politics & policy
US interest rates
Federal Reserve
Donald Trump

