FT PROFESSIONAL

Federal Reserve

Jay Powell says rates ‘may not need to rise as much’ due to bank stress
Fed chair weighs possibility of credit crunch as US central bank fights against inflation

Fed chair Jay Powell, centre, spoke at a conference in Washington on Friday © Bloomberg

Colby Smith in Washington
Published MAY 19 2023

The chair of the Federal Reserve says that the credit crunch expected in the aftermath of recent
bank failures may limit how much the US central bank will need to raise its benchmark interest
rate, as officials weigh the need to forgo further tightening.
Jay Powell on Friday highlighted the potential fallout from the failures of Silicon Valley Bank and
other lenders and emphasised the high degree of uncertainty clouding the economic outlook.

“While financial stability tools help to calm conditions in the banking sector, developments there,
on the other hand, are contributing to tighter credit conditions and are likely to weigh on economic
growth, hiring and inflation,” he said at a conference organised by the Fed in Washington. “As a
result, our policy rate may not need to rise as much as it would have otherwise to achieve our
goals.”
He added that the extent of the effect on credit conditions was “highly uncertain”.
Powell’s comments come as Fed policymakers debate whether to press ahead with an 11th straight
rate rise at a meeting next month or pause their campaign of tightening monetary policy to fight
persistent inflation.
Since March 2022, the Fed has raised its benchmark policy rate by more than 5 percentage points
to a target range of 5-5.25 per cent — an increase that Powell on Friday framed as notable.
“We’ve come a long way in policy tightening . . . we face uncertainty about the lagged effects of our
tightening so far and about the extent of credit tightening from these banking stresses,” he said.
Powell separately added that the Fed could “afford to look at the data” before deciding on further
rate rises.
That echoed a message sent during the Fed’s last meeting, which was interpreted by economists as
support for an imminent pause. Powell on Friday said no decision had yet been made for the June
meeting. As chair, he will be tasked with unifying what appears to be a divided group of officials,
with several policymakers recently raising doubts that the Fed had raised its policy rate enough to
get inflation under control.
Lorie Logan, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas and a voting member on the Federal
Open Market Committee, on Thursday said there was not yet convincing evidence for a pause.
Speaking with the Financial Times, James Bullard, president of the St Louis Fed, said on Thursday
that slow progress on the inflation front “may warrant taking out some insurance by raising rates
somewhat more to make sure that we really do get inflation under control”.

Also on Friday, John Williams, president of the New York Fed, warned that despite the coronavirus
pandemic and the recent surge of inflation, central banks were most likely to have to grapple with
low interest rates once the shocks pass.
“There is no evidence that the era of very low natural rates of interest has ended,” he said, referring
to a level of rates that neither stimulates nor restrains growth.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US banks
Global inflation
US economy
US inflation
US interest rates

