FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Lex

Walmart: inflation means retail giant is no longer cheap and chirpy
Drastic measures taken to ensure its shelves are stocked for the holiday season have come at a cost

To break out of range bound trading, Walmart will have to find new sources of growth © Bloomberg

Published NOV 16 2021

Who’s afraid of the big, bad price rise? Not Americans. US inflation may have hit a 31-year high in
October. But consumers are still eager to spend.
This should be good news for Walmart. The world’s biggest bricks-and-mortar retailer reported
strong third quarter sales and raised its full-year outlook. Supply chain disruptions and fears of
empty shelves are prompting many Americans to get a head start on their holiday shopping this
year.

Do not be fooled by the topline growth. There are reasons shares in Walmart have gone nowhere
this year. The stock is down 3 per cent, compared to the near-50 per cent gains at rivals Target and
Home Depot.
To ensure that its shelves are stocked for the holidays, Walmart has taken drastic measures,
including using air freight and chartering its own cargo ships. This has helped the company
increase US inventory by 11.5 per cent during the quarter.
That has come at a cost. Gross margins fell 42 basis points to 24.6 per cent. This compares to 34.1
per cent at Home Depot and the 30 per cent reported by Target during the second quarter.
Pressure will persist. Labour shortages mean low-waged Walmart will need to pay up for workers.
Home Depot sells bulky items that cannot be readily ordered from Amazon. Target has strong inhouse brands that help protect margins. But Walmart is more exposed to the inflationary squeeze.
It has greater exposure to grocery, where profits are notoriously thin. Many of the products it
carries can readily be bought elsewhere. A slowdown in online sales growth is worrying.
Walmart still trades at a premium to Target, which is on 21 times forward earnings. But the
valuation has dropped from 27 to 23 times over the past year. To break out of range bound trading,
Walmart will have to find new sources of growth. Potential catalysts include its advertising
business and its marketplace unit where third party vendors sell their wares.
Walmart, once written off as a doomed physical retailer, has staged a remarkable recovery. The era
of rising inflation means another reinvention is required.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Lex
US companies
Retail sector
Corporate earnings and results
Walmart Inc

