FT PROFESSIONAL

Federal Reserve

Jay Powell struggles to explain ‘hawkish pause’ to sceptical economists
Federal Reserve takes a breather on rate rises but signals even more tightening ahead

Fed chair Jay Powell: ‘It seemed to us to make obvious sense to moderate our rate hikes as we got closer to our destination’ ©
Financial Times

Colby Smith in Washington
Published JUN 15 2023

When the Federal Reserve announced its first reprieve in an aggressive 15- month-long campaign
of interest rate rises on Wednesday, there was a sting in the tail.
As widely expected, the US central bank held its benchmark rate steady after 10 consecutive
interest rate increases. But it also signalled it would need to squeeze the world’s largest economy
much more before the year is out in order to get a handle on stubbornly high inflation.
Rather than raising rates just once more by a quarter point, as had been widely anticipated, most
officials are now forecasting there will have to be two such increases this year, according to the socalled “dot plot” of their projections that accompanied the rate move.

The incongruence of the decision — a pause accompanied by an even more hawkish stance —
prompted Fed chair Jay Powell to launch a staunch defence of the US central bank’s approach that
left some economists unconvinced.
“It seemed to us to make obvious sense to moderate our rate hikes as we got closer to our
destination,” Powell explained during a press conference on Wednesday as reporters peppered him
with questions about the apparent contradiction.
Moving more gingerly would not only give the Fed more time to assess future economic data and
the damage done by the recent regional banking crisis, argued Powell. It would also allow
policymakers to gauge the effect of the rapid monetary tightening enacted since last March, which
may not yet be showing up fully in the real economy.
However, Vincent Reinhart, who worked at the Fed for more than 20 years and is now at Dreyfus
and Mellon, described Wednesday’s move as “a policy mistake wrapped in a communication error”.
The Fed’s policy mistake, said Reinhart, was a failure to respond to a string of strong economic
reports since the last meeting in May despite an oft-repeated pledge to be “data dependent”.
The communication error, he added, was to seed expectations for a pause some five weeks ago, a
move that left it reluctant to adapt “to changed circumstances”.

Fed officials skip rate rise but signal two more to come this year
Each dot represents one FOMC participant's projection for the midpoint of US interest rates (%) from
every meeting since Sept 2022. Boxplot lines indicate first quartile, median and third quartile values
for each annual projection.
June 2023

Mar 2023

Dec 2022

Sept 2022

2024

2025

Longer run

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

2023

According to the latest dot plot, most officials are now projecting the federal funds rate will peak at
a new target range of 5.5-5.75 per cent, half a percentage point higher than when comparable
forecasts were published in March.

“They can’t sell it as a prudential delay of policy to await more information when the information
you got led you to revise up your forecast [half a percentage point],” said Reinhart.
Some economists detected signs of growing division among Fed policymakers in the topsy-turvy
messaging.
In the run-up to this week’s meeting, faultlines had emerged between officials over how much more
pain to inflict on borrowers. Those advocating for a more cautious approach cited the possibility
that the cumulative effect of the Fed’s tightening had yet to show up. That could result in
unnecessary pain for an economy that, on the face of it, still seems to be remarkably resilient.
The hawkish cohort, meanwhile, pointed to scant progress in stamping out “core” inflation, which
strips out volatile food and energy costs.
“To us, this looks like a meeting where the committee was split, everybody got something, and
nobody got everything,” concluded economists at LH Meyer, a research firm.
Tiffany Wilding, chief US economist at Pimco, guessed that the unanimous vote to pause on
Wednesday had been the result of this “horse-trading”.
The compromise that now appears to be on the table is for the Fed to raise rates potentially as soon
at its meeting at the end of July. Powell on Wednesday sent a strong hint that this might happen
when he said the gathering next month would be a “live one”.
By then, said Powell, the Fed could take stock of three months of economic data as well as the
“evolving risk picture”. At one point, he described the move as a “skip” before correcting himself: “I
shouldn’t call it a ‘skip’ — the ‘decision’.”
That only fuelled more questions over why the Fed was holding back, especially after the economic
projections released on Wednesday showed officials had become decidedly more negative on the
inflation outlook and more bullish on economic growth and the labour market.
“If July is already live, it does raise the question [of] why do you even stop if you’re willing to
immediately say we are going to go back?” asked Jean Boivin, the former deputy governor of the
Bank of Canada who is now head of the BlackRock Investment Institute.

Dean Maki, chief US economist at Point72 Asset Management, cautioned the data ahead of the July
meeting was unlikely to alleviate Fed hawks’ concerns, warning that “tension” among officials
would likely persist before the central bank eventually implemented another rate rise next month.
Wilding said she also expects the Fed to raise the benchmark rate then but admitted she is sceptical
the central bank will follow through on the second increase, an assumption based on her forecast
that the economy will soon slow down more decisively.
She added the risks of the central bank overdoing it have risen as the end point of the tightening
campaign has been steadily pushed out and revised higher.
“That destination at some point needs to stop being a moving target [because] monetary policy
works through lags and you run the risk of figuring out later on that you did too much” she said.
“Then monetary policy all of a sudden just seems way too tight.”

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US economy
US inflation
US interest rates
Central banks
Federal Reserve

