FT PROFESSIONAL

UK inflation

Inflation taking ‘lot longer’ than hoped to come down, Andrew Bailey says
Gilt yields pass ‘mini’ Budget levels as former Treasury chief warns that Sunak could be facing voters during a
recession

‘As I’m afraid this morning’s numbers illustrate, we’ve got a very tight labour market,’ said BoE governor Andrew Bailey © Tolga
Akmen/EPA-EFE/Shutterstock

Chris Giles, Delphine Strauss, George Steer and George Parker in London
Published JUN 13 2023 | Updated JUN 13 2023, 18:14

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
Inflation is “taking a lot longer” than hoped to come down, Bank of England governor Andrew
Bailey said on Tuesday, as investors bet on further interest rate rises on the back of strong wage
data.

Following the release of figures showing annual private-sector wage growth climbing to 7.6 per
cent in the three months to April, short-term gilt yields rose above the highs reached during the
turmoil around Liz Truss’s “mini” Budget last autumn.
“As I’m afraid this morning’s numbers illustrate, we’ve got a very tight labour market,” Bailey
said. “We still think the rate of inflation is going to come down, but it’s taking a lot longer than we
expected.”
Lord Nick Macpherson, Treasury permanent secretary in 2005-2016, raised the grim prospect for
Rishi Sunak on Tuesday that the prime minister could be fighting an election in 2024 in the face of
a recession.
“It’s still possible the government may get lucky: underlying inflation may come down quicker than
expected,” he wrote on Twitter. “But I wouldn’t bet on that. Much more likely that the Bank of
England will raise rates to a level where a recession next year becomes inevitable.”
Alongside still low unemployment, the rise in wages was far above the level the BoE thinks is
consistent with bringing inflation back to its 2 per cent target.
Two-year gilt yields on Tuesday rose 0.26 percentage points to 4.89 per cent, compared with their
peak of 4.64 per cent in the aftermath of the unfunded tax cuts announced in the “mini” Budget in
late September. Yields on gilts with longer maturities have not exceeded last autumn’s levels. The
pound gained 0.8 per cent against the dollar, rising to $1.2610.

With borrowing costs rising across the board, many of the UK’s biggest lenders have pulled
mortgage deals or raised their interest rates in recent days.
On Monday, Santander temporarily withdrew all of its fixed and tracker mortgages for new
borrowers “in light of changing market conditions”, it said.
The prospect of more financial stress to come for households with mortgages heaped pressure on
government ministers as the Labour party blamed the government for “economic irresponsibility”
and creating mortgage misery.
Responding to a question as part of a discussion on creative industries on Tuesday, Jeremy Hunt,
the chancellor, said that he was “really very aware of the pain felt by many families”.
“The biggest single thing that we can do to reduce the pressure on families is to support the Bank of
England as they bear down on inflation,” Hunt added.

For financial markets, the strong wage data compounded April’s high 8.7 per cent inflation rate,
which suggested UK price growth was returning to normal levels much more slowly than in other
countries.
“If there was still any doubt about the direction of monetary policy, these data should solidify
another interest rate increase from the Bank of England next week and probably more in the
coming months,” said Yael Selfin, chief economist at KPMG.
Markets expect the BoE to increase rates from the current 4.5 per cent to 5.76 per cent by the end
of this year, pushing up borrowing costs for the government and mortgage holders.
Megan Greene, who will join the BoE’s Monetary Policy Committee in July, told MPs on Tuesday
that she thought high inflation was now driving wages higher. “There are second-round effects that
seem to be seeping in,” she told the Treasury committee of the House of Commons.
While she did not indicate how she would vote in her first MPC meeting in August, Greene said the
BoE was right to have raised rates in May, something that Silvana Tenreyro, who she is replacing
on the committee, voted against.
“I think there is some underlying persistence [to inflation] and so getting from 10 per cent to 5 per
cent . . . is probably easier than getting from 5 per cent to 2 per cent,” she added.
Samuel Tombs, chief UK economist at the consultancy Pantheon Macroeconomics, said wage
growth had “far too much momentum” for the MPC to stop raising rates.
He noted that although analysts had expected April’s increase in the statutory minimum wage to
cause a one-off bump in pay, the data showed wage growth was being driven primarily by higherpaying sectors such as finance and manufacturing and could therefore be expected to continue at a
similar pace.
Additional reporting by Daniel Thomas and James Pickford
This article has been amended to correct the peak two-year gilt yield in the wake of the “mini”
Budget

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Gilts
UK employment
UK inflation
UK interest rates
Bank of England

