FT PROFESSIONAL

Markets Briefing Equities

US stocks fall as investors assess pace of rate rises to come
Bond markets also come under selling pressure

The S&P 500 closed 0.9% lower, while the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite index lost 1.5% on Monday © Getty Images

Nikou Asgari in London and Harriet Clarfelt in New York
Published DEC 19 2022 | Updated DEC 19 2022, 16:24

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
US stocks and global fixed-income markets fell on Monday, extending a drop last week sparked by
a new round of interest rate rises and hawkish comments from central bankers.
The S&P 500 closed 0.9 per cent lower, while the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite index lost 1.5 per
cent at the start of the last full trading week of the year, as investors assessed the pace and scale of
interest rate rises to come.

The Federal Reserve, European Central Bank and the Bank of England each pushed interest rates
higher by 0.5 percentage points last week, a step down in the previous pace of increases. However,
they stood firm on their plans to continue their attempts to slow rising prices, with the ECB saying
“inflation remains far too high”. Their warnings that further interest rate rises are needed to bring
record inflation under control sent global stock markets lower last week.
Among individual stock moves on Monday, Facebook’s parent company Meta was among the
biggest fallers, sliding more than 4 per cent. The company has been served with a complaint from
the EU’s antitrust watchdog over concerns that the social network’s classified advertising service is
unfair to rivals.
Fixed-income markets were also under selling pressure on Monday. The 10-year UK gilt yield
jumped 0.17 percentage points to 3.5 per cent, while the equivalent US Treasury yield gained 0.11
percentage points to 3.59 per cent. Higher yields indicate falling prices.
In European equities, the regional Stoxx 600 gained 0.3 per cent, while Germany’s Dax advanced
0.4 per cent. The UK’s FTSE 100 climbed 0.4 per cent. The gains on Monday for the Stoxx 600
came after two straight weeks of falls.
“The market doesn’t believe the Fed, with a pricing disconnect now opening up,” wrote Jim Reid,
head of global fundamental credit strategy at Deutsche Bank. “The market is now worried the ECB
has upped its level of hawkishness.”
Some economists say inflation may have peaked in the UK, US and Europe but are considering the
extent to which the factors pushing prices higher will continue into the new year, and whether
economies will flash warning signs of distress, such as through higher unemployment figures.
“Markets are likely to continue to trade the peak US inflation narrative into year-end,” said Jordan
Rochester, G10 FX strategist at Nomura.
In currency markets, the pound traded flat against the dollar at $1.214. An index tracking the
greenback against six peers was flat.

In Asia, Hong Kong’s Hang Seng index dropped 0.5 per cent while China’s CSI 300 index slid 1.5
per cent.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Currencies
Bonds
US equities
Equities
Markets Briefing

