FT PROFESSIONAL

US inflation

US inflation hits 8.5% after surge in energy and food prices
Top Fed official warns of ‘upside’ risk to price growth due to war in Ukraine and Chinese lockdowns

The rise in consumer prices in March was marginally above Wall Street’s expectations © Robyn Beck/AFP/Getty Images

Colby Smith and Eric Platt in New York and Lauren Fedor in Washington
Published APR 12 2022 | Updated APR 12 2022, 15:25

US consumer price growth surpassed 8 per cent in March, its fastest pace since 1981 following a
surge in the cost of energy and food, maintaining pressure on the Federal Reserve to take
aggressive action to tackle inflation.
The consumer price index increased 8.5 per cent last month compared with a year ago, marginally
above Wall Street’s expectations, the Bureau of Labor Statistics said on Tuesday. The monthly rise
was 1.2 per cent, the fastest jump since September 2005 and a sharp acceleration from the 0.8 per
cent increase recorded in February.

Once volatile items such as food and energy are stripped out, “core” CPI advanced 0.3 per cent in
March. That was the slowest rise since September, but still translated to a 6.5 per cent annual
increase.
Lael Brainard, a Fed governor awaiting Senate confirmation to be the next vice-chair, warned of
“upside” risks to inflation, citing Russia’s invasion of Ukraine — which is fuelling energy and food
costs — and new Covid-19 lockdowns in China that could worsen supply chain constraints.
“The economy has sustained now a number of these kinds of inflationary shocks from external
events,” she said at a Wall Street Journal event. “We’ve seen a lot of resilience but we’ve also seen
very high inflation.”

It was the first inflation reading that included a full month of the impact of the war in Ukraine,
which has significantly clouded the global outlook. Russia is one of the world’s largest energy
exporters, and Russia and Ukraine are major suppliers of wheat and other grains.

The moderation in “core” CPI prompted a rally in Treasuries and overnight funding markets, as
traders scaled back their bets for the pace and size of interest rate increases this year.
However, markets are still pricing a rise in the Fed’s benchmark policy rate to 2.45 per cent by the
end of 2022, down from 2.59 per cent earlier in the day but sharply higher than the current range
of 0.25 per cent to 0.50 per cent.
The Biden administration on Monday blamed surging prices on the war, with White House press
secretary Jen Psaki saying the CPI reading would be “extraordinarily elevated due to Putin’s price
hike”.
But Joe Manchin, the moderate Democratic senator from West Virginia, said on Tuesday: “The
Federal Reserve and the administration failed to act fast enough, and today’s data is a snapshot in
time of the consequences being felt across the country.”
He added that it was a “disservice to the American people to act as if inflation is a new
phenomenon”.
Manchin, who has blocked Biden’s sweeping social spending plans on the grounds they were
inflationary, said bringing prices “under control will require more aggressive action” from the Fed,
as well as a shift in energy policy on Capitol Hill.
“Everyone is worried about inflation,” said Vincent Reinhart, a former senior Fed staff member
who is now chief economist at Mellon. “It is number one in the polls. It is consuming the Fed’s
bandwidth right now.”
The figures underscored the effect of volatile commodity prices, with a jump in petrol accounting
for more than half of the overall increase in March CPI. Over the past year, prices at the pump have
climbed 48 per cent, including an 18.3 per cent rise between March and February.
Beyond energy prices, core services prices accelerated in March, up 0.6 per cent from the previous
month, or 4.7 per cent annually. That is the largest monthly jump since August 1992.

But there were signs that prices were slowing elsewhere. Used car prices, which have been
skyrocketing since the coronavirus pandemic pushed many Americans away from mass transit, fell
3.8 per cent in March. The cost to buy a new vehicle rose 0.2 per cent from a month prior, a lower
increase than the gain registered in February.
Concerns that inflation will become more deeply entrenched in the world’s largest economy have
prompted the US central bank in recent weeks to assume a more aggressive approach to tightening
monetary policy.
The Fed is now poised to raise interest rates by half a percentage point at its next policy meeting in
May, double the pace of its March rate rise, as it seeks to lift its benchmark policy rate to a more
“neutral” level that neither aids nor constrains growth by the end of the year.
Officials forecast that rate to be roughly 2.4 per cent, implying at least one more half-point
adjustment in addition to four more quarter-point rate rises in 2022.
The central bank is also set to soon begin shrinking its $9tn balance sheet, building up to as much
as $95bn a month over roughly three months.
Brainard said that process would start as early as June and, combined with rate rises, should bring
the Fed’s policy to a more neutral setting “over time”.
US Treasury prices climbed on Tuesday, pushing the yield on the benchmark 10-year note down
0.06 percentage points to 2.72 per cent. Stocks, which had initially rallied after the data were
released, slipped, with the S&P 500 falling 0.3 per cent in a volatile session.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US economy
US inflation

Federal Reserve
US
Eric Platt

