FT PROFESSIONAL

Federal Reserve

Jay Powell says Fed will ‘keep at it’ in hawkish inflation speech
Chair of US central bank uses Jackson Hole address to warn of ‘sustained period’ of lower growth

Jay Powell with colleagues Lael Brainard and John Williams at the Jackson Hole economic symposium © David Paul
Morris/Bloomberg

Colby Smith in Jackson Hole, Wyoming and Eric Platt in New York
Published AUG 26 2022 | Updated AUG 26 2022, 16:20

Jay Powell declared the Federal Reserve “must keep at it until the job is done” as he used a speech
at Jackson Hole to deliver his most hawkish message to date on the US central bank’s
determination to tame surging inflation by raising interest rates.
In a hotly anticipated address, the Fed chair said successfully reducing inflation would probably
result in lower economic growth for “a sustained period”. To do that, interest rates would need to
stay at a level that restrains growth “for some time”, he warned.

The US stock market slid sharply after Powell spoke, with the benchmark S&P 500 index falling 3.4
per cent, while the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite tumbled 3.9 per cent. It was the biggest one-day
decline for both indices since mid-June.
Powell predicted there would “very likely be some softening of labour market conditions” and
“some pain” for households and businesses. “A failure to restore price stability would mean far
greater pain,” he added.
Yields on short-dated US government debt climbed. On the policy-sensitive two-year Treasury
note, the yield increased 0.01 percentage points to 3.38 per cent. The yield on the 10-year note —
which moves with growth and inflation expectations — was flat at 3.03 per cent. Yields rise when a
bond’s price falls.

Powell’s speech contrasted with his message at last year’s Jackson Hole symposium, when he
predicted surging consumer prices were a “transitory” phenomenon stemming from supply chainrelated issues. It has since become clear that inflation is demand-driven and therefore likely to
persist for longer.
“We are taking forceful and rapid steps to moderate demand so that it comes into better alignment
with supply, and to keep inflation expectations anchored,” Powell said.
The Fed chair harked back to the lessons of the 1970s, when the US central bank presided over a
period of turmoil after it made several policy blunders and failed to rein in inflation. That forced
Paul Volcker, who became Fed chair in August 1979, to choke the economy and cause more pain
than would have been necessary if officials had acted more quickly.
Fed watchers noted that “Keeping At It” — a phrase Powell used twice in his speech — is the title of
Volcker’s 2018 memoir, which was published just over a year before he died.
“The historical record cautions strongly against prematurely loosening policy,” Powell said.
The main lesson of that period was “central banks can and should take responsibility for delivering
low and stable inflation,” he said, reiterating the Fed’s “unconditional” commitment to tackling
price growth.
He also highlighted the risk posed by inflation remaining too high for too long, setting off a chain
reaction with people expecting further price increases.
“The longer the current bout of high inflation continues, the greater the chance that expectations of
higher inflation will become entrenched,” he warned.
Financial markets had rallied in recent weeks amid expectations the Fed might ease up its efforts to
damp demand as economic data deteriorated further and concerns grew over the risks of being too
heavy-handed.
Last month the central bank delivered its second consecutive 0.75 percentage point rate rise,
bringing the federal funds rate to a new target range of 2.25 per cent to 2.50 per cent.

Fed officials are debating whether a third increase of the same magnitude will be necessary at its
meeting in September, or if they should opt for a half-point rise instead.
Futures markets suggested traders accept the central bank could keep interest rates higher for
longer. It marked a noticeable deviation, given investors had been reluctant to bet that the Fed
would keep interest rates high in the face of a slowing economy.
“The Fed is willing to take more short-term pain to ensure the longer-term gain of price stability,”
said Ashish Shah, the chief investment officer of public investing at Goldman Sachs Asset
Management. “You are unlikely to see a dovish pivot into weaker growth. They would rather make
sure that inflation and inflation expectations are sufficiently anchored.”
Powell said at some point it would be appropriate to slow the pace of interest rate increases. But he
dismissed recent data showing a slight easing of inflation as insufficient, adding: “A single month’s
improvement falls far short of what the committee will need to see before we are confident that
inflation is moving down.”
Most officials say they can bring inflation under control without causing a painful recession. That
runs counter to the consensus view among Wall Street economists, who predict at least a mild
recession some time in the next year.
Economists also expect the US unemployment rate to rise beyond the 4.1 per cent broadly
anticipated by Federal Open Market Committee members and regional bank presidents in June.
The unemployment rate, a bright spot as the economic picture darkens, hovers at a multi-decade
low of 3.5 per cent.
Are we heading towards a global recession? Our economics editor Chris Giles and US economics
editor Colby Smith discussed this and how different countries are likely to react in our latest IG
Live. Watch it here.
​Letter in response to this article:​
Why chest-beating central bankers have me worried / From Stefan Gerlach, Chief Economist,
EFG Bank, Zurich Switzerland; Deputy Governor, Central Bank of Ireland, 2011-2015

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US inflation
US interest rates
Central banks
Federal Reserve
US

