FT PROFESSIONAL
UPDATED 4 YEARS AGO

News updates from November 30: Powell says Fed may accelerate
‘taper’, Germany’s Scholz favours vaccination mandate, Brazil
confirms Latin America’s first cases of Omicron
Today’s top headlines:

• UK to offer booster jabs to all eligible people by the end of January
• FDA advisers recommend Merck’s Covid antiviral pill for vulnerable adults
• Microsoft shareholders back protest vote over sexual harassment claims
• Eurozone inflation rises to single-currency record of 4.9%
• Zara owner Inditex completes ‘generational’ management shake-up
Edited by
Peter Wells and Mamta Badkar in New York, Sarah Provan, Leke Oso Alabi,
Adrienne Klasa and Oliver Ralph in London, and William Langley in Hong Kong

Nov 30, 17:49

Bryan Harris in São Paulo

Brazil confirms Latin America’s first
reported cases of Omicron variant
Brazilian authorities on Tuesday confirmed that two citizens
had tested positive for the Omicron strain of coronavirus in the
first reported cases of the new variant in Latin America.

Health regulator Anvisa said a traveller arriving in São Paulo
from South Africa had tested positive for the new strain. His
wife, who had not travelled, also tested positive.
The man arrived in Brazil on November 23, a day before the
variant was first reported to the World Health Organization
from South Africa, Anvisa said in a statement. He had arrived
with a negative PCR test for Covid-19, but before a planned
return to South Africa, the couple tested positive.
The result was sent for genetic sequencing and the Omicron
variant was detected, Anvisa added.

Nov 30, 17:05

Jamie Smyth in New York

FDA advisers recommend Merck’s Covid
antiviral pill for vulnerable adults
US government advisers have recommended allowing doctors
prescribe Merck’s antiviral pill to high risk patients, paving the
way for authorisation of a new treatment for Covid-19 amid
concerns about the Omicron variant and a recent uptick in
infections.

Health experts on an US Food and Drug Administration panel
voted by a narrow margin of 13 to 10 on Tuesday to give the
green light to the drug molnupiravir, which trials have shown
can reduce the risk of severe disease and death from Covid-19
by almost a third in unvaccinated people.
However, the advisers said the easy-to-administer treatment
should only be recommended for high risk patients over 18
years of age and tight restrictions need to be placed on any use
by pregnant women because of concerns about side-effects
linked to the antiviral pills.
US authorities are not bound to follow the recommendation by
the Antimicrobial Drugs Advisory Committee but most experts
expect the Biden administration to move swiftly to authorise
the drug.
Regulators in the UK and EU, which are also battling a new
wave of infections ahead of winter, granted emergency use
authorisation for molnupiravir in November.

Nov 30, 15:21

Kate Duguid and Derek Brower in New York, Naomi Rovnick in London

Omicron variant and Fed chief deliver onetwo punch to US stocks
Wall Street stocks sank on Tuesday, as concerns about the
potentially damaging economic effects of the Omicron
coronavirus variant and hawkish comments from the chair of
the US central bank swirled through markets.
The benchmark S&P 500 index was down 1.6 per cent, erasing
gains made on Monday. The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite
share gauge also dropped 1.4 per cent.
In prepared remarks on Monday, Jay Powell, Federal Reserve
chair, said rising Covid-19 cases and the Omicron variant, “pose
downside risks to employment and economic activity and
increased uncertainty for inflation”.
The move in markets was amplified on Tuesday by the
suggestion from Powell, during congressional testimony, that
the US central bank may be open to accelerating its monetary
tightening programme to combat inflation.
His comments helped push up shorter-dated Treasury yields,
which track interest rate expectations, and weighed down
longer-dated Treasury yields, which move with growth and
inflation expectations. The difference between five- and 30-year
Treasury yields narrowed by the most since March 2020.
The two-year Treasury yield, which is particularly sensitive to
interest rate expectations, rose 0.04 percentage points to 0.52
per cent.

Earlier, Europe’s Stoxx 600 index closed 0.9 per cent lower,
following a choppy day of trading marked by worries about the
new variant’s potential to evade vaccines. Hong Kong’s Hang
Seng index and Tokyo’s Nikkei 225 each shed 1.6 per cent.
Read more on the day’s market moves here

Nov 30, 15:02

Dave Lee in San Francisco

Executive leading Meta’s stuttering digital
currency project quits
David Marcus, the Meta executive tasked with launching its
stuttering digital currency project, has announced he is leaving
the company at the end of the year.
The departure comes after Meta, Facebook’s parent company,
suffered a string of setbacks in its attempts to launch ambitious
cryptocurrency products, including a new digital token, Diem.
In a series of tweets posted on Tuesday morning, Marcus said
he planned to launch something new outside the social
networking giant, and that his “entrepreneurial DNA has been
nudging me for too many mornings in a row to continue
ignoring it”.

The 48-year-old had been at Meta for seven years, and
previously was head of Facebook Messenger. He joined the
company from PayPal. In August 2020, Marcus was made head
of Facebook Financial, a new unit designed to oversee all of the
company’s payments products.
Marcus said he found “comfort and confidence” in his soon-tobe former team, which will now be led by Stephane Kasriel,
currently head of product for Meta’s digital wallet, Novi.
“They will continue to execute our important mission well
under @skasriel’s leadership, and I can’t wait to witness this
from the outside,” Marcus wrote. “I know there’s greatness
ahead.”
Responding on Facebook, Mark Zuckerberg said: “We wouldn’t
have taken such a big swing at Diem without your leadership
and I’m grateful you’ve made Meta a place where we make
those big bets.”
Meta declined to comment.
Read more on Marcus’s departure here

Nov 30, 14:32

Richard Waters and Patrick Temple-West

Microsoft shareholders back protest vote
over sexual harassment claims
Microsoft’s shareholders have backed a protest vote calling on
the company to reveal more about its handling of sexual
harassment claims, in the shadow of recent cases and the
revelation that co-founder Bill Gates had a relationship with a
company employee.
The call amounted to a rare vote against management at the
company’s annual shareholder meeting, and brought an
immediate promise from Microsoft of more transparency.
However, the company stopped short of saying it would reveal
details about individual cases and it did not make any
commitment to reopen its handling of cases from previous
years.
The shareholder revolt followed years of complaints from some
workers that the company had brushed pervasive claims of
harassment under the carpet. Arjuna Capital, which submitted
the shareholder proposal challenging management, said
Microsoft’s human resources department had upheld only one
claim against the group out of a total of 238 that were included
in a class-action lawsuit alleging discrimination and
harassment in 2012.
“Reports of Bill Gates’ inappropriate relationships and sexual
advances towards Microsoft employees have only exacerbated
concerns, putting in question the culture set by top leadership,
and the board’s role holding those culpable accountable,” it
added.

Microsoft revealed this year that its board had hired an external
firm to look into a decades-old “intimate relationship” that
Gates had with an employee. The co-founder stepped down
from the board last year. The outcome of any investigation has
not been revealed.
Read more on the shareholder vote here

Nov 30, 13:18

Kate Duguid and Derek Brower in New York, Naomi Rovnick in London

Omicron, Powell deliver market one-two
punch
Stocks fell and bond prices rose on Tuesday first on fears about
the potential effects of the Omicron coronavirus variant on the
global economy, then on Federal Reserve Jay Powell’s
suggestion that the central bank may be open to accelerating its
monetary tightening programme to combat inflation.
The benchmark S&P 500 index fell 1.6 per cent, erasing gains
on Monday and adding to the 2.3 per cent drop on Friday when
concerns about impact of the new variant first took hold. The
tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite share gauge also dropped 1.6 per
cent.

Shorter-dated Treasury yields, which move with interest rate
expectations, climbed. The two-year Treasury yield, which is
particularly sensitive to interest rate expectations, rose 0.05
percentage points to 0.52 per cent. While longer-dated
Treasury yields, which move with growth and inflation
expectations, slipped.
One measure of the Treasury yield curve, the spread between
five- and 30-year yields, narrowed by the most since March
2020.
Concerns about the Omicron variant hit global equities and oil
prices on Tuesday, while investors seeking out safe-haven
investments parked cash in high-grade government bonds. The
move came as Powell testified during a congressional hearing
on Tuesday that rising Covid-19 cases and the emergence of the
Omicron variant “pose downside risks to employment and
economic activity and increased uncertainty for inflation”.
Those market moves were then exacerbated when Powell, in
response to lawmakers’ questions, admitted that inflation risks
were persistent. He signalled that the Fed would be open to
discussing an accelerated taper of its $120bn a month asset
purchases, raising the possibility of interest rate increases
earlier next year.
Read more on today’s market moves here

Nov 30, 13:04

Obey Manayiti and Andrew Edgecliffe-Johnson in New York

Retailers able to withstand Omicron
impact, trade group says
Retailers will be able to weather the impact of the new Omicron
variant of Covid-19, the National Retail Federation predicted on
Tuesday, even as new data painted a mixed picture of consumer
spending during the critical holiday shopping season.
“We continue to believe that the retail industry is prepared for
whatever might happen and we will have a great holiday
season,” said Matthew Shay, the NRF’s president, welcoming
the guidance from US President Joe Biden on Monday that
there was no reason for Americans to panic.
Shay also welcomed Biden’s indication that he was not planning
to impose fresh closures or lockdowns based on the limited
current information about the severity of the Omicron variant,
but said that sales of goods were likely to be more resilient to
any disruptions than experience-based businesses like hotels
and restaurants.
An NRF survey found that almost 180m shoppers made instore or online purchases over the five-day Thanksgiving
holiday weekend, exceeding its expectations, but this was below
last year’s turnout and on average each spent about $301, about
$10.50 less than in 2020.
Adobe Analytics also reported that online sales during the
extended weekend were 1.4 per cent below last year’s level, at
$33.9bn.

But Vivek Pandya, Adobe’s lead analyst, said that early deals
had boosted sales before the holiday weekend. Both Adobe and
the NRF held to their earlier forecasts of growth of about 10 per
cent for the entire season from November 1 to December 31.
The comments came as the Conference Board reported that its
index of consumer confidence had fallen in November to a
nine-month low, missing economists’ expectations of a more
modest drop.

Nov 30, 12:54

Lauren Fedor in Washington

Trump chief of staff Mark Meadows cooperating with January 6 panel
Donald Trump’s former chief of staff is co-operating with a
congressional probe into the former president’s actions on
January 6, in a break with other Trump allies that is likely to
allow the one-time congressman to avoid potential criminal
charges.
Bennie Thompson, the Democratic congressman chairing the
select committee investigating the attack on the US Capitol,
issued a statement on Tuesday confirming that Mark Meadows
was “engaging” with the committee through his attorney.

“He has produced records to the committee and will soon
appear for an initial deposition,” Thompson said, adding that
the committee “will continue to assess his degree of compliance
with our subpoena after the deposition”.
News of Meadows’s co-operation comes just weeks after Steve
Bannon, another Trump confidante, was indicted by a federal
grand jury for contempt of Congress after failing to comply with
a subpoena from the panel of lawmakers. Many in Washington
had expected Meadows’ case to follow a similar trajectory, after
the former chief of staff initially refused to engage with the
committee. Meadows was a Republican congressman from
North Carolina before being tapped as Trump’s fourth and final
chief of staff.
The January 6 committee, which is compromised mostly of
Democrats but includes two Republicans — Liz Cheney of
Wyoming and Adam Kinzinger of Illinois — has issued
subpoenas for dozens of Trump allies in recent months. Among
them are former senior adviser Stephen Miller, former White
House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany, and Trump’s 2020
campaign manager, Bill Stepien.
Trump has also sued the panel in an effort to block the release
of documents relating to the final days of his administration,
arguing the records could be withheld under “executive
privilege”, which protects certain presidential communications.
But a federal judge denied Trump’s request this month, saying
his claims were misplaced. Trump appealed the ruling.

Nov 30, 12:11

Guy Chazan in Berlin

Germany’s Scholz favours mandatory
vaccines amid rise in Covid cases
Olaf Scholz, Germany’s chancellor-designate, said he is in
favour of mandatory vaccinations for all, increasing the
likelihood the country will follow Austria in creating a legal
requirement for its entire population to get the jab.
A decision on whether to move ahead with the mandate could
come as early as Thursday, at a meeting between Scholz and the
leaders of Germany’s 16 federal states to discuss new measures
to contain the coronavirus crisis.
Scholz’s change of heart — he had long argued that there was no
need for mandatory vaccinations — reflects the gravity of the
fourth wave sweeping through Germany, with new infections
reaching levels not seen at any previous stage of the pandemic.
The Robert Koch Institute, Germany’s main public health
authority, reported 45,753 new cases of Covid-19 in the past 24
hours, and an incidence of 452.2 cases per 100,000 people over
the past seven days.

Germany has struggled with stubbornly low levels of
vaccination. Only 68.5 per cent have received two shots — a
much lower percentage than in countries such as Spain and
Portugal. Many of the people in intensive care wards with
serious cases of Covid-19 are unvaccinated.
“In these circumstances . . . it’s a morally justifiable position to
say that in order to protect all of us, this is a case where ideally
everyone should get vaccinated,” he told Bild TV. Scholz said he
favoured a free vote in the Bundestag on the issue.
Scholz expressed his support for mandatory vaccinations
during a phone conference with outgoing chancellor Angela
Merkel and the leaders of Germany’s 16 federal states on
Tuesday afternoon.
According to German media reports, he said the mandate
should come into force at the start of February. Scholz called for
30m first, second and booster doses of Covid-19 vaccine to be
administered in Germany by Christmas. He also called for
chemists, dentists and vets to be drafted into the vaccination
drive.

Nov 30, 11:31

Jasmine Cameron-Chileshe

UK to offer booster jabs to all eligible people
by the end of January
UK prime minister Boris Johnson on Tuesday said that the
government would aim to offer all eligible adults a Covid-19
booster jab by the end of January 2022, in response to the rapid
spread of the Omicron variant of coronavirus.
Speaking at a televised briefing, Johnson said that he
recognised the public exhaustion over the virus, but argued that
the government was taking “proportionate” measures in
response to the new threat.
“The best single defence against omicron is to get vaccinated
and to get boosted,” Johnson said, adding that vaccines would
be administered in more than 1500 community pharmacy sites,
temporary vaccination centres and hospital hubs.
At least 400 military personnel would also be involved in the
expanded vaccination rollout, the prime minister said, adding
that the vaccination programme would move down age cohorts
in five-year bands, ensuring that the most vulnerable are
boosted first.
“It is time for another great British vaccination effort, we have
done it before and we are going to do it again,” he added.

Nov 30, 11:24

Colby Smith in New York

Powell says Fed may accelerate asset
purchase ‘taper’ to tame inflation
Elevated inflation may prompt the Federal Reserve to speed up
how quickly it scales back its massive asset purchase
programme, Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell told US
lawmakers on Tuesday.
In testimony delivered at a joint congressional hearing with
Janet Yellen, Treasury secretary, Powell acknowledged the risk
of higher inflation had increased and said the Fed could move
more quickly to normalise its ultra-accommodative monetary
policy as a result.
“The economy is very strong and inflationary pressures are
high, and it is therefore appropriate in my view to consider
wrapping up the taper of our asset purchases, which we actually
announced at the November meeting, perhaps a few months
sooner,” he said. “I expect that we will discuss that in our
upcoming meeting in a couple of weeks.”
The central bank began scaling back its $120bn-a-month asset
purchase programme several weeks ago at a pace of $15bn each
month, which suggested the stimulus would end in June.
During his testimony, he acknowledged that the price increases
that propelled inflation to its fastest pace in 30 years had
spread “much more broadly” across the economy in recent
months and were “notable” in certain sectors, leading to what
he described as a more elevated threat of “persistently higher
inflation”.

While Powell said he still expected inflation to abate
“significantly” over the next year as supply and demand
imbalances were resolved, it was no longer appropriate to
frame ongoing price pressures as “transitory”.
“The word transitory has different meanings to different
people. To many it carries a sense of shortlived. We tend to use
it to mean that it won’t leave a permanent mark in the form of
higher inflation,” Powell said. “I think it’s probably a good time
to retire that word and try to explain more clearly what we
mean.”
Read more on Powell’s testimony here

Nov 30, 10:40

Mamta Badkar in New York

US consumer confidence falls to 9-month
low
Consumer confidence in the US dipped to to its lowest levels
since February this month, as concerns about rising prices and
the spread of the Delta variant of Covid-19 weighed on
optimism.
The Conference Board’s consumer confidence index slipped to
109.5 in November, from 111.6 the previous month, falling to a
nine-month low. That missed economists’ expectations for a
more modest drop to 111, according to a Reuters polls.

“Concerns about rising prices—and, to a lesser degree, the Delta
variant—were the primary drivers of the slight decline in
confidence,” said Lynn Franco, senior director of economic
indicators.
The US is grappling with the highest rates of inflation in about
30 years, raising debate among top central bank officials about
how the Federal Reserve should manage ongoing price
pressures.
While the holiday shopping season is expected to be good for
retailers — consumers already having spent heavily over the
Thanksgiving weekend — the proportion of Americans planning
to purchase homes, vehicles and major appliances in the next
six months fell.
The report showed that expectations about short-term job and
income prospects had declined, even as Americans continue to
quit the workforce at record rates, while expectations about
economic growth prospects edged up.
The survey was conducted before the Omicron coronavirus
variant was first reported last week. Franco said both a
potential resurgence in Covid and inflation could pose a risk to
consumer confidence in the coming months. Fed chair Jay
Powell has cautioned that the new variant could imperil the
economic recovery and exacerbate inflationary pressures.

Nov 30, 09:52

Mamta Badkar in New York

US home price growth cools in September
US home prices grew at a slower pace in September, suggesting
the market is starting to cool after demand surged earlier in the
pandemic.
Home prices were up 19.5 per cent nationally in September,
down from 19.8 per cent the previous month, according to the
S&P CoreLogic Case-Shiller index. Home prices nevertheless
remain close to record levels.
“If I had to choose only one word to describe September 2021’s
housing price data, the word would be ‘deceleration’,” said
Craig Lazzara, managing director and global head of index
investment strategy at S&P Dow Jones Indices.
“Housing prices continued to show remarkable strength in
September, though the pace of price increases declined
slightly,” he added.
US home prices surged to record levels during the pandemic, as
demand for homes surged but housing inventory remained
tight. However, economists have said that high prices have left
many potential buyers on the sidelines.
“We expect some slowing in home price inflation in the months
ahead, but expect annual price growth will remain in double
digits through the first quarter of 2022,” said Nancy Vanden
Houten, economist at Oxford Economics, noting that limited
inventory will continue to underpin home prices.

Today’s report showed property values in the 20-city index rose
19.1 per cent, from 19.6 per cent the previous month.
Phoenix, Tampa, and Miami reported the highest year-on-year
gains among the 20 cities.

Nov 30, 09:47

Naomi Rovnick in London

US stocks drop, joining global sell-off on
Omicron concerns
Global equities and oil prices fell today, while investors parked
cash in high-grade government bonds, as trading was
dominated by concerns over the Omicron coronavirus variant.
Wall Street’s broad-based S&P 500 share index, which had
rallied yesterday to reflect a burst of optimism that market
volatility sparked by Omicron would turn out to be a buying
opportunity, opened 0.7 per cent lower.
Europe’s Stoxx 600 index was 0.5 per cent lower by midafternoon in London, following a choppy day of trading marked
by worries about the new variant’s potential to evade vaccines.
Hong Kong’s Hang Seng index and Tokyo’s Nikkei 225 both lost
1.6 per cent.

The moves came after Stéphane Bancel, chief executive of
vaccine maker Moderna, used an interview with the Financial
Times to forecast that existing vaccines would be much less
effective at tackling Omicron than earlier strains of coronavirus.
He also warned that pharmaceutical companies would take
months to manufacture new variant-specific jabs at scale.
Brent crude, the international oil benchmark, lost 3.7 per cent
to $70.76 a barrel, about a three-month low.
Read more on today’s market moves here

Nov 30, 09:18

Jyoti Mann and Owen Walker

Deutsche Bank’s Sewing hails German
commitment to capital markets union
The EU’s ambitions for a much-delayed capital markets union
have been given a shot in the arm by the incoming German
government, according to the chief executive of Deutsche Bank,
the country’s largest lender.
“There is a clear commitment in the language which I haven’t
seen from the German side before that there is a clear goal for
the banking union, including the entrance into a European
deposit insurance scheme plus the capital markets union,”
Christian Sewing told the FT’s Global Banking Summit today.

Olaf Scholz succeeded Angela Merkel as German chancellor last
week after striking a three-way coalition deal.
The former finance minister promised the “biggest industrial
modernisation of Germany in more than 100 years”, a pledge
that includes action on climate change and investment in the
country’s infrastructure,
Sewing said that “the green deal in Europe will only happen
with the capital markets union in Europe, otherwise we won’t
have the resources to finance that”.
The eurozone’s capital markets remain fragmented, something
the European Commission has sought to address through its
long-running capital markets union plan, which includes a
banking union project.
The EU has spent more than five years working on the capital
markets union. The goal is to make it easier for businesses to
raise money on public markets and reduce their reliance on
bank funding.

Nov 30, 08:14

Hannah Kuchler in London

GSK poaches key vaccine executive from
Pfizer
GlaxoSmithKline has poached a key vaccine executive from
Pfizer, as the UK drugmaker makes a big bet on the future of
mRNA technology.
Philip Dormitzer will this week join GSK as global head of
vaccines research and development, leaving the company where
he played an important role in the development of Pfizer’s
Covid-19 vaccine, including helping to forge the partnership
with BioNTech.
He led the US drugmaker’s viral vaccines portfolio, including its
work on an mRNA vaccine for influenza with BioNTech, and
oversaw its vaccine candidate for respiratory syncytial virus,
which will compete with a shot GSK is developing.
Pfizer did not respond to a request for comment.
Hal Barron, GSK’s chief scientific officer, said he was
“delighted” to welcome Dormitzer with his “significant
experience” in mRNA and other technologies, saying the hiring
was key to ensuring GSK remained a leader in vaccines.
“The importance of vaccines has never been clearer, and the
pace of technological innovation has rarely been greater,” he
said.
Read more on GSK’s hire here

Nov 30, 07:46

Adrienne Klasa

Early Regeneron tests indicate antibody
treatment could be less effective against
Omicron
Early testing indicates that the mutations in the Omicron
variant of coronavirus may hamper the ability of Regeneron’s
antibody drug to treat Covid-19, the company said, indicating
that some therapies may have to be adapted to tackle the virus’s
latest evolution.
The findings are a first indication that treatments developed to
tackle Covid-19 may have lost effectiveness as the virus evolves.
“The individual mutations present in the Omicron variant
indicate that there may be reduced neutralisation activity of
both vaccine-induced and monoclonal antibody conveyed
immunity,” Regeneron said today.
Tests so far have been done using lab samples and modelling.
“Further analyses are ongoing to confirm and quantify this
potential impact using the actual Omicron variant sequence,” it
added.
Regeneron’s share price fell more than 2.8 per cent in premarket trading. Global markets were down today after
Moderna’s chief executive told the Financial Times he thought
existing vaccines would struggle against the Omicron variant.

Regeneron’s Regen-Cov treatment is made up of a cocktail of
two monoclonal antibodies that block the virus that causes
Covid-19, and is widely used to treat patients.
Regeneron said it has a large collection of monoclonal
antibodies, and that early analyses indicated some of the next
generation antibodies it is developing could retain effectiveness
against Omicron.
Eli Lilly, another maker of antibody drugs to treat Covid-19, did
not immediately respond to a request for comment.

Nov 30, 07:41

Polina Ivanova

Putin orders plan to prepare for Omicron
variant
Russia’s healthcare system must be on high alert because of the
Omicron coronavirus variant, President Vladimir Putin has
said, and ordered the government to prepare a plan of action
within a week.
“First of all, we must constantly monitor the effectiveness of
tests and vaccines,” Putin said today.
“It is important to maintain the healthcare system in a state of
heightened readiness, including in terms of supplies of
medicines, oxygen, hospital bed space and the most effective
approaches to treating the disease,” Putin said.

Health officials have not detected the variant in Russia,
reported Interfax, citing the head of the federal consumer
watchdog Rospotrebnadzor on Sunday.
Putin said that Russia could introduce measures to support
citizens in the context of the pandemic.
“We will work on other solutions in this regard, within our
financial capabilities,” said Putin at a forum organised by VTB
bank.

Nov 30, 07:27

Benjamin Parkin in New Delhi

India’s third-quarter economic growth picks
up
India’s economy expanded 8.4 per cent in the third quarter,
fuelling hopes that the country will bounce back from a bruising
pandemic slowdown.
The rebound for the three months ending September, from the
same period a year earlier, was higher than many economists
had expected. The economy however reflects little real
expansion after it shrank 7.4 per cent in the same quarter in
2020.

India was hard hit by lockdown measures imposed to stem the
spread of coronavirus, but a sharp drop in infections in recent
months has allowed activity to pick up again. Sales over Diwali,
the biggest festival of the year, rose to records this month and
other indicators such as electricity consumption have
improved.
The IMF expects gross domestic product growth to accelerate to
9.5 per cent in the financial year that ends in March. That
compares with 8 per cent in China.
Analysts however point to lower-than-expected activity in
manufacturing and some industrial sectors. Wholesale prices
are rising more swiftly, which some economists fear could hurt
the recovery.

Nov 30, 06:46

Mamta Badkar

What to watch in the Americas today
Powell/Yellen testimony: Rising Covid-19 cases and the
new Omicron coronavirus variant could imperil the economic
recovery and worsen inflationary pressures, Federal Reserve
chair Jay Powell is set to tell US lawmakers at a joint
congressional hearing with Treasury secretary Janet Yellen on
Tuesday. The hearing is set to begin at 10am Eastern Time.

Merck Covid pill: A group that advises the US Food and Drug
Administration is scheduled to meet later today to determine
whether to grant emergency use authorisation to Merck’s
experimental Covid-19 pill, molnupiravir. The treatment has
already been approved in the UK, and is being reviewed by
European regulators.
Economic data: Data from S&P CoreLogic Case-Shiller is
expected to show home price growth for 20 major metro areas
cooled to 19.3 per cent in September, from 19.7 per cent the
previous month. Strong demand and limited inventory
continue to keep home prices near record levels. Meanwhile,
high inflation has weighed down on consumer sentiment and
the Conference Board’s consumer confidence index is expected
to have dipped to 110.9 in November, down from 113.8 the
previous month.
Canada is expected to report annualised third-quarter GDP
growth of 3 per cent. Growth is expected to have stalled in
September, from the previous month, when the economy
expanded 0.4 per cent.
Earnings: Salesforce and Allbirds are due to report after the
market closes. Cloud-computing company Salesforce is
expected to report an increase in third-quarter revenues as it
benefits from hybrid work. Meanwhile, footwear brand Allbirds
is due to report its first results since its public listing. The San
Francisco-based company is expected to report a loss of 12
cents a share, on revenues of $61.9m.

Markets: US stock futures suggest that the S&P 500 will open
down almost 1 per cent while Nasdaq will fall 0.45 per cent.
Wall Street partially recovered on Monday, with the S&P 500
and Nasdaq Composite rising 1.3 per cent and 1.9 per cent
respectively, after news of the Omicron coronavirus variant
triggered a sharp sell-off in global equities late last week.

Nov 30, 06:46

Eleni Varvitsioti

Greece to fine unvaccinated older citizens as
Covid spreads
Greece plans to impose fines on the over-60s who have refused
to be vaccinated against Covid-19 as infections hit daily records.
“We are focusing our efforts on the protection of our fellow
citizens and, for this reason, their vaccination will be
mandatory from now on,” the prime minister told his cabinet
today.
The unvaccinated of that age cohort face a monthly €100 fine if
they do not book their first dose by mid-January, said Kyriakos
Mitsotakis. Money raised will go towards funding hospitals,
Mitsotakis added.
About 580,000 over-60s have not had a jab in Greece, while
60,000 received a shot in November.

“This is not a punitive decision but will protect our citizens,”
said Mitsotakis in today’s cabinet meeting.
Greece has totalled close to 1m coronavirus infections and more
than 18,000 deaths linked to Covid-19.
The country was one of the first in Europe to start
administrating the third vaccine doses. At the same time, it has
prohibited unvaccinated people from entering indoor spaces
even if they have proof of a negative Covid-19 test.

Nov 30, 06:17

Adrienne Klasa

National Grid and ScottishPower to pay
record £158m settlement to Ofgem in
Western Link probe
National Grid and ScottishPower have agreed to pay £158m in a
probe by the UK’s energy market watchdog into delays to a
£1.2bn subsea power cable project, a record settlement for the
regulator.
Ofgem’s investigation, launched in January 2020, into the
Western Link project found that the two-year delay limited the
ability of renewable energy generators in Scotland to export
electricity to England and Wales, leading to higher costs for
consumers.

The investigation found that the delays were largely caused by
problems in manufacturing, cable laying and testing. While
National Grid and Scottish Power “did not cause or exacerbate
the delays . . . [they] are ultimately responsible, as license
holders, for the delay caused by their supply chain”, Ofgem
concluded.
A £15m tranche of the package will be paid into a redress fund,
while the rest will be returned to customers via lower electricity
bills.
The 422km undersea Western Link cable links electricity
transmission between Scotland and Wales, often from
renewable sources. The 2,250MW of power capacity it provides
is seen as essential to Britain achieving its net zero targets.
“Innovative projects such as the Western Link are vital in
moving clean energy from where it’s produced to where it’s
needed,” said Catherine Scott, Ofgem’s director of enforcement.
“However, they must be delivered on time and to the standards
agreed. Where they are not, as the energy regulator, we will
hold the licensees accountable.”
“The joint venture recognises it is ultimately accountable for the
delay and has therefore agreed to the redress package,”
National Grid said.

Nov 30, 06:07

Neil Hume

European gas prices rise as early cold snap
grips
European gas prices have climbed above €100 a megawatt hour
on fresh fears of shortages after the continent’s colder than
normal start to the winter.
Gas futures linked to TTF, Europe’s wholesale gas price, today
rose as much as 5.4 per cent to €100MWh, the equivalent of
more than $190 a barrel of oil, before easing to €98.35MWh.
The benchmark gas contract has risen from a low of €65 a
month ago but remains below October’s record of more than
€117.
“European storage levels are falling faster than usual and this
will probably only accelerate as we move deeper into winter,”
said Warren Patterson, head of commodities strategy, at ING.
European gas storage is a little under 70 per cent full, compared
with a five-year average of almost 86 per cent at this stage of
the year, as supplies from Russia disappoint.
“Daily Russian flows have increased by around 43 per cent
since the start of the month, but they are around 22 per cent
below the levels seen at the same stage last year,” said
Patterson.

Traders said auctions for space on Ukrainian pipelines, which
carry natural gas to Europe, and capacity at a key German
compression station would provide an indication of Russia’s
willingness to supply the region.
Gazprom, Russia’s state-backed gas group, yesterday said it did
not see keeping the gas in European storage as commercially
attractive given the storage prices.
Some politicians in Europe have blamed the Kremlin-controlled
company for not supplying enough gas. The company said it
has fulfilled all of its contractual obligations.

Nov 30, 05:49

Kate Beioley, Legal Correspondent

UK regulators order Facebook to sell
platform Giphy
The UK competition regulator has told Meta, formerly known
as Facebook, to sell online image platform Giphy, the first time
that the watchdog has demanded the unwinding of a completed
Big Tech deal.
The $315m deal, if it had gone ahead, would have put the US
tech group in a position to “increase its already significant
market power in relation to other social media platforms”, the
Competition and Markets Authority said in a statement today.

The CMA has been investigating the merger since June last
year. The watchdog said its competition concerns could only be
resolved by the sale of Giphy in its entirety, in spite of solutions
put forward by Meta.
Regulators were expected to reverse the deal in a move that is
seen as an escalation of their assault on Big Tech, the Financial
Times yesterday.
Meta could have choked off rivals’ access to gifs, which is short
for the graphics interchange format and refers to short takes of
looping animation, and driven more traffic to its own site, the
regulator said today. Meta accounts for 73 per cent of user time
spent on social media in the UK.
Regulators ruled that the deal would have reduced competition
in the UK display advertising market, despite Giphy having no
presence or plans in that sector.
Meta said it was “reviewing the decision and considering all
options, including appeal”.
“Consumers and Giphy are better off with the support of our
infrastructure, talent, and resources,” Meta said in a statement.
Together they would enhance “Giphy’s product for the millions
of people, businesses, developers and API partners in the UK
and around the world who use GIPHY every day”.

Nov 30, 05:42

Martin Arnold

Eurozone inflation rises to 4.9%, a record in
single currency era
Inflation in the eurozone has risen to 4.9 per cent, a record
since the single currency was created more than two decades
ago, putting more pressure on the European Central Bank to
reduce its monetary stimulus.
The increase in eurozone inflation, as measured by the
harmonised index of consumer prices, outstripped the 4.5 per
cent expected on average by economists polled by Reuters.
Annual price growth increased from 4.1 per cent a month ago.

A 27.4 per cent rise in energy prices from a year earlier was the
biggest driver of inflation in the 19 countries that share the
euro, but the prices of food, services and goods all rose faster
than the ECB’s 2 per cent target in November.

The ECB has tried to calm anxiety about rising prices by saying
that many one-off causes of inflation such as soaring energy
prices and supply chain bottlenecks will fade next year.
However, there are signs that ECB officials are doubting
whether inflation will fall as rapidly as they anticipated. “In
2022, bottlenecks may last longer than expected,” Luis de
Guindos, vice-president of the ECB, said in an interview with
Les Echos published today. “As a result, there’s a risk that
inflation will not go down as quickly and as much as we
predicted.”

Nov 30, 04:15

Adrienne Klasa

Mayor of London pushes for masks on
public transport to be mandatory for
foreseeable future
London’s mayor has welcomed the reintroduction of mandatory
face masks on public transport from today, and is pushing the
UK government to make this a requirement well beyond the
initial three-week window envisioned for the policy.
“On public transport, because more often than not we’ve got to
be confined and we can’t keep our social distance, let’s keep
[masks] mandatory,” he told Sky News on Tuesday morning,
adding he hoped this would persist even if the Omicron variant
did not prove as bad as some people feared.

“One of my requests to the government is . . . let’s not have
hokey cokey when it comes to the data on face mask wearing,
when they’re going to review it in three weeks’ time,” he added.
Until today, masks have not been mandatory in shops or on
public transport since restrictions were lifted over the summer.
London had asked travellers to continue wearing them while
using the transport network but had no means to enforce the
policy.
However, Khan did not think keeping masks on while in
hospitality venues should be required. “I don’t think we’re there
yet, where we need to introduce them in hospitality,” he said,
backing Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s view.
“We haven’t got vaccine passports in England and I don’t think
we need them yet. The key is to regularly test and get the jab,”
he added.

Nov 30, 03:53

Adrienne Klasa

Boosters give ‘background immunity’ to
cope with Omicron strain, says senior UK
health official
Booster shots for “background immunity” will be essential to
countering the spread of the Omicron variant of coronavirus
despite worries about reduced effectiveness against mutations,
the head of the UK’s health security agency has said.
“Getting that high background immunity level on a population
basis may to some extent counter the reduced effectiveness [of
vaccines] against this particular variant,” Jenny Harries, who
also leads the NHS’s test and trace programme, told Sky News
on Tuesday.
However she said that data were preliminary and should be
treated cautiously as the government makes decisions about
pandemic policy.
“In the UK we are still in a Delta wave, which is not causing
significant harm but has been sustained,” she said. “What we’re
not clear on yet is whether this variant would outcompete the
Delta” or whether the Delta variant stays dominant, which
would mean the vaccines remain effective.
Paul Moss, professor of immunology and an adviser on the
government’s Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies group,
echoed the advice on boosters and encouraged people to use
lateral flow tests before attending holiday social events.
“We should be concerned but not panicking at the current
time,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today show.

“The boosting effect is extremely effective,” he said, adding “we
may need boosters regularly” over the coming years.

Nov 30, 03:27

Naomi Rovnick

European stocks drop as concerns over
Omicron variant flare up
European and Asian stock markets fell on Tuesday, while
investors parked money in high-grade government bonds, as
traders’ attention was dominated by concerns over the Omicron
coronavirus variant.
The regional Stoxx 600 share index, which had rallied on
Monday along with Wall Street stocks to reflect a burst of
optimism that market volatility sparked by Omicron would turn
out to be a buying opportunity, opened 1.1 per cent lower. The
UK’s FTSE 100, Germany’s Dax and France’s Cac 40 all
dropped around 1 per cent in morning trading.
Hong Kong’s Hang Seng index dropped 1.5 per cent and
Tokyo’s Nikkei 225 lost 1.6 per cent, while futures tracking Wall
Street’s S&P 500 index fell almost 1 per cent in early European
action.
Brent crude, the international oil benchmark, dropped 3 per
cent to $71.27 a barrel, to hit its lowest level since early
September.

The moves came after Stéphane Bancel, chief executive of
vaccine maker Moderna, told the Financial Times that existing
vaccines would be much less effective at tackling Omicron than
earlier strains of coronavirus. He also warned pharmaceutical
companies would take months to manufacture new variantspecific jabs at scale.

Nov 30, 03:16

George Hammond

Landlord Shaftesbury rebounds as London’s
West End enjoys revival
The West End has enjoyed a rapid revival since pandemic
restrictions were loosened in July, but the coronavirus crisis is
likely to change the area for good, according to local landlord
Shaftesbury.
Weekend traffic in the central London neighbourhood has hit
pre-pandemic levels as locals and visitors venture back to the
area’s bars, theatres, restaurants and offices, said Shaftesbury.
The value of the company’s 16-acre estate, which includes
Carnaby Street, Seven Dials and parts of Chinatown, increased
5.2 per cent in the six months to September 31, paring back
some of the losses incurred since March 2020 when
coronavirus restrictions were first introduced.

An end to Covid-19 measures in England from July 19
unleashed “a remarkable bounce back in activity”, said chief
executive Brian Bickell, “as domestic visitors and workers
returned, with footfall and spending in our villages well on the
way to returning to, or in some cases already exceeding, their
pre-pandemic levels.”
But the rebound could not fully erase the impact of coronavirus.
Shaftesbury posted a loss after tax of £194.9m for the full year
to September 31, thanks to a sharp decline in the value of its
properties, particularly shops, in the first half of the year. The
company reported a loss of £699.5m in the previous financial
year.

Nov 30, 03:02

Alistair Gray

Magazine publisher Future upgrades
outlook after buoyant earnings
Future has once again shrugged off difficulties facing magazine
publishers, delivering a sharp rise in annual revenues and
profits and predicting that results for the current year would
top forecasts.
The Bath-based company, whose titles include Marie Claire,
TechRadar and Horse & Hound, said on Tuesday that it
expected results for the year to September 2022 to be
“materially above” existing estimates.

The earnings upgrade follows a series of acquisitions by Future,
which expanded its interests in personal finance in August with
the purchase of MoneyWeek and Kiplinger. It also bought news
title The Week.
It will help reassure investors in the company, whose shares
have lost momentum in recent weeks. They have still gained 90
per cent over the past year but are down 9 per cent in the past
month.
Future’s titles that target niche consumer hobbies won readers
during lockdown restrictions, and chief executive Zillah ByngThorne has pursued a strategy of generating online
commissions from ecommerce.
A jump in digital advertising and ecommerce sales helped
revenues in the year to September rise 79 per cent to £607m
while pre-tax profits more than doubled to £107.8m.
The board of Future, whose publications include Guitar World,
Country Life and Wallpaper*, raised the dividend for the year
75 per cent to 2.8p a share.

Nov 30, 02:55

Philip Georgiadis

EasyJet warns of softening demand after
emergence of new coronavirus strain
Low-cost carrier easyJet warned it had seen a “softening” in
demand following the emergence of a new variant of
coronavirus as the group reported its second consecutive £1bn
annual loss.
The airline said on Tuesday that there had been “some
softening of trading” for the rest of this year, and that some
passengers had begun rearranging their flights after the UK and
other European countries reintroduced travel restrictions to
limit the spread of the Omicron variant.
It was too early to tell if the industry’s fragile recovery had been
blown off course, EasyJet added, but the airline had slightly
pared back its flight schedules for the rest of this year.
The airline plans to fly 65 per cent of 2019’s capacity in the
current quarter, down from the 70 per cent forecast in a trading
update in October.
“We remain mindful that many uncertainties remain as we
navigate the winter,” said chief executive Johan Lundgren.
EasyJet shares have fallen 10 per cent over the past two trading
days as fears of the new Omicron variant have shaken the
aviation industry.

Still, the carrier was upbeat over the longer-term recovery from
the pandemic, and said it was still seeing “a good level” of
bookings for the spring and summer, and that it expected to
return to near pre-pandemic levels of trading by the end its
fourth quarter, which runs from July to September.
The forecast came as easyJet reported a loss of £1.14bn for its
financial year ending in September. It also lost more than £1bn
in its previous financial year, a period that included the start of
the coronavirus crisis.

Nov 30, 02:48

Laura Pitel in Ankara

Turkish economy grows in the third quarter
amid depreciating lira
Turkey’s economy grew at an annual rate of 7.4 per cent in the
third quarter of this year, as analysts warned that the pace of
expansion was unsustainable given rapidly rising inflation and
a depreciating lira.
A boom in exports, which rose by close to 26 per cent year-on
year, helped to drive growth in the country’s economy between
July and September. The expansion in GDP was also buoyed by
consumer and government spending.

Turkey’s $795bn economy is expected to have grown by about 9
per cent overall in 2021, according to the Turkish government
and independent forecasters — a rate likely to beat most of its
emerging market peers.
Yet analysts say that the fast-paced expansion is unlikely to last.
Prior to Tuesday’s announcement, Goldman Sachs warned that
the data would “tell us little about economic activity going
forward,” adding: “Anecdotal evidence suggests that the recent
lira depreciation has been disruptive to economic activity.”
The lira has lost around 35 per cent of its value against the
dollar since the start of September, when President Recep
Tayyip Erdogan pressured his country’s central bank to start
cutting interest rates despite annual inflation that is running at
almost 20 per cent.

Nov 30, 02:43

Siddharth Venkataramakrishnan

Wise profits dented by recruitment drive
and flotation costs
Profits at currency exchange fintech Wise dropped in the first
half of its financial year despite growing revenues, as it
recruited more staff and paid for its flotation.

In the six months to 30 September, the company reported pretax profits of £18.8m, compared with £20m in the previous
year. Revenues rose by 33 per cent to £256.3m over the same
period, but this was countered by rising costs.
“Over the first half of this year we’ve improved our products
and engineered away substantial points of friction in the
payments process, enabling us to sustainably lower prices while
continuing to invest in growing the business for the long term,”
said co-founder and chief executive Kristo Käärmann,
The bulk of the increase was in costs such as outsourced
services, which more than doubled to £58.3m. Wise said that
this was driven by the costs of becoming a public company; in
July it went for a direct listing in London with a valuation of
close to £9bn.
Wise also said that it had expanded its team by 32 per cent over
the past year to 2,883 employees.
The 10-year-old money transfer company has expanded rapidly
since Käärmann and co-founder Taavet Hinrikus started it as a
way to reduce the fees they paid to move funds between London
and their native Estonia.
Over the half year, it processed £34bn of cross-currency
transactions, a 44 per cent increase on the previous year.

Nov 30, 02:28

Sarah Provan

Zara owner Inditex completes ‘generational’
shake-up with new chair and chief executive
Zara owner Inditex has appointed a new chair and chief
executive, as the Spanish retailer completes a “generational
handover process” that it began a decade ago.
The board approved Marta Ortega Pérez as chair, effective from
April 1. She is the daughter of the fashion retailer’s founder and
majority shareholder Amancio Ortega, Spain’s richest man.
Óscar García Maceiras, general counsel and secretary of the
Inditex board, will take over from Carlos Crespo as chief
executive immediately. Crespo, at the helm since July 2019, will
become chief operating officer.
The appointments complete a process that began in 2011 when
Ortega was replaced as chair and will be up for approval at the
group’s next annual meeting, the group said on Tuesday.
“We believe that the time has come to turn a new page,” said
Pablo Isla, who will continue as executive chair until March 31.
He became deputy chair and chief executive in 2005 and
executive chair from 2011. “Making this transition a reality is
the culmination of my commitment to Inditex and to Amancio
Ortega.”
The appointment of García Maceiras “was already foreseen
since his incorporation into the company due to his abilities
and qualities”, added Isla.

The organisational structure incorporates a management
committee, made up of longstanding executives from the group.
Inditex has opened or expanded its Zara stores this year and
plans others, which will add to the retailer’s tally of more than
6,600 outlets worldwide.

Nov 30, 01:48

Leke Oso Alabi in London

What to watch in Europe today
Inflation: The EU publishes flash eurozone inflation figures
on Tuesday. Yesterday, German inflation rose 6 per cent to its
highest level since 1992. The European Central Bank has tried
to calm anxiety about rising prices by saying many one-off
causes of inflation such as soaring energy costs and supply
chain bottlenecks will fade next year.
Germany: Europe’s largest economy publishes unemployment
data. Labour shortages are visible in Germany, which
previously relied on migrants to replace an ageing population.
However, jobless rates are higher in other parts of the
continent. France’s unemployment — 8.1 per cent in the third
quarter — is still much higher than Germany’s 3.4 per cent, or
the UK’s 4.3 per cent for the same period.

UK: The British Retail Consortium releases its monthly
economic briefing. Retail sales increased 1.3 per cent in October
compared with the same month last year, up from 0.6 per cent
in September, according to BRC data.
Markets: Asian markets continued their Omicron-induced
decline on Tuesday. South Korea’s Kospi closed 2.5 per cent
down, Hong Kong’s Hang Seng index fell about 2.2 per cent and
Japan’s Topix dipped more than 1 per cent. The Asian declines
defied a tech-led rally in US stocks on Monday that saw the S&P
500 close up 1.3 per cent and the tech-heavy Nasdaq finish 1.9
per cent higher. FTSE 100 futures fell 1.2 per cent while Euro
Stoxx 50 futures were 1.7 per cent lower.

Nov 29, 22:59

William Langley in Hong Kong

Hong Kong and China stocks decline while
Japan and Australia rebound
Most Asia-Pacific markets continued to decline on Tuesday as
investors tried to grapple with the potential effects of the new
Omicron variant of Covid-19.
Markets in Hong Kong, China and South Korea declined while
Australia and Japan recovered some of their Monday losses.
The varied performance of Asian stocks followed the beginnings
of a recovery in the US on Monday, fuelled by tech stocks.

Wall Street’s benchmark S&P 500 index gained 1.3 per cent,
after falling 2.3 per cent on Friday. The tech-heavy Nasdaq
Composite index rose 1.9 per cent.
Hong Kong’s Hang Seng index dropped as much as 1.5 per
cent.
China’s CSI 300 dipped 0.3 per cent.
South Korea’s Kospi fell 1.4 per cent
Japan’s Topix and Australia’s S&P/ASX 200 bucked the
trend, gaining as much as 1.5 per cent and 1.3 per cent
respectively.

Nov 29, 22:15

William Langley in Hong Kong

Shares in Macau’s biggest junket operator
plummet as boss offers to quit

Wynn Macau shares shed as much as 2.4% on Tuesday after Suncity’s chair was arrested at the weekend ©
Daniel J Groshong/Bloomberg

Shares in Macau’s biggest junket operator Suncity plunged
almost 48 per cent on Tuesday morning, after Alvin Chau, the
group’s chairman, was arrested at the weekend.
The price fall followed the resumption of trading in the
company’s shares after a one-day suspension on Monday.
In a filing to the Hong Kong stock exchange announcing the
trading resumption, Suncity revealed that Chau had offered to
resign from his positions as chair and director.
Chau was arrested in Macau on Saturday as part of a broad
crackdown on the city’s gambling industry. Chinese authorities
have in recent months been pushing the city to diversify its
gaming-heavy economy.

Junket operators — middlemen who introduce high-spending
gamblers to individual casinos — have been a particular target
for Beijing, which introduced a law in March 2020 that
outlawed marketing to attract potential gamblers inside China.
The latest price fall took the already low stock to trade for as
little as HK$0.133 on Tuesday, and capped off a plunge of
almost 79 per cent in the past year.
Elsewhere in Macau, shares in gaming groups Galaxy
Entertainment fell by 1.3 per cent, while Wynn Macau shed as
much as 2.4 per cent on Tuesday, following more significant
declines on Monday.

Nov 29, 21:54

Chan Ho-him in Hong Kong

Hong Kong tightens travel restrictions to
prevent Omicron spread
Hong Kong officials said they would tighten the city’s
international travel restrictions, already some of the strictest in
the world, to prevent the spread of the Omicron variant of
Covid-19.
Authorities said they would ban non-resident arrivals from 13
more countries where cases of the new variant were recorded,
including Australia, Canada and Germany.

The Chinese territory on Saturday banned non-residents from
eight African countries, including Botswana and Zimbabwe,
from flying in after two Omicron cases were confirmed.
Health officials said residents returning from the countries
would now need to be fully vaccinated and undergo 21 days of
quarantine, with some of them also required to complete the
first seven days at the government’s Penny’s Bay facility.
The city also reported its third case of the Omicron variant, a
37-year-old man who flew in from Nigeria last week via
Ethiopia and Thailand and was confirmed positive during his
quarantine.
“Hong Kong’s very stringent system in … quarantine and
testing [arrangements] has successfully stopped the
transmission of the three [Omicron] cases that we have
identified in our designated quarantine hotels,” Sophia Chan,
food and health secretary, said on Monday.
The city has been in the final stages of preparations to restart
quarantine-free travel with mainland China and is hoping to
reopen the border for limited travel next month at the earliest.
Officials said the plans were so far “unaffected” by the Omicron
variant.

Nov 29, 20:44

William Langley in Hong Kong

China’s factory activity expands as it shrugs
off 2-month decline
China’s manufacturing activity expanded in November, beating
estimates as a strong uptick in production helped the economy
to shrug off two months of contraction.
The official manufacturing purchasing managers’ index came in
at 50.1 for November, just above the threshold that separates
contraction from expansion in the sector.
But the figures for companies of different sizes diverged, with
large and medium-sized manufacturers on average reporting an
expansion in their activities, while small enterprises notched
another contraction.
Earlier in November, China’s State Council unveiled new
measures to support small and medium-sized enterprises.

Employees assemble pianos at a Perth Music Group factory in Yichang, Hubei province © Getty Images

China’s economy has been buffeted by a property sector
downturn and energy shortages in recent months. Both factors,
however, showed signs of abating in November as officials
signalled a crackdown on developers might soon ease, and
intervened to control fuel prices.
Last month, the manufacturing PMI came in at 49.2, the lowest
level since February last year. This month’s reading beat analyst
forecasts for a contraction reading of 49.6.
The official figures for November, released by the National
Bureau of Statistics, showed a 7.4 per cent increase in
production in the manufacturing sector.
The other main components of the index — new orders, raw
material stores, workers employed and supply delivery times —
all remained in contraction territory.
China’s non-manufacturing PMI also posted an expansion in
activity, coming in at 52.3. The figure brought the country’s
composite PMI to 52.2, its fourth consecutive expansion.

Nov 29, 20:28

Song Jung-a in Seoul

South Korea’s industrial output shrinks at
fastest pace in more than a year
South Korea’s industrial output in October fell at its fastest pace
in nearly a year and a half, government data showed on
Tuesday, as car production was hit by the protracted global
semiconductor shortage.
Factory output last month unexpectedly shrank by a seasonally
adjusted 3.0 per cent from September, according to data from
Statistics Korea, missing the 0.4 per cent growth forecast by
analysts polled by Reuters.
The October decline followed a 1.1 per cent fall in September
and was the biggest decrease since May 2020.
Finance minister Hong Nam-ki blamed global supply chain
disruptions for the sluggish production data and expected the
November figures to improve on strong exports and a recovery
in domestic consumption.
However, he cautioned against growing risks related to the
Covid-19 pandemic amid concern that the global spread of the
new Omicron variant could exacerbate supply chain problems.
“We should remain on alert as risks grow internally and
externally with the new variant while downside risks continue
due to global supply disruption and inflationary pressure,”
Hong wrote on Facebook.

The data improved on an annual basis, with output increasing
4.5 per cent from a 1.8 per cent fall in September. Automobile
production shrank 13.5 per cent year on year while
semiconductor output jumped 38.7 per cent.

Nov 29, 18:33

William Langley in Hong Kong

What to watch in Asia today

Aung San Suu Kyi supporters call for her release during a protest in Yangon in February © AFP via Getty
Images

PMI: China’s manufacturing purchasing managers’ index,
released today, will give a sense of the state of factory
activity. Last month, manufacturing PMI rose to its highest
level since June.

GDP: India’s second-quarter gross domestic product growth is
expected to come in at 8.1 per cent, according to the
government-owned State Bank of India. Growth in the same
period of 2020 contracted 7.3 per cent. In Turkey, the economy
is expected to have expanded 7.5 per cent in the third quarter,
according to a Reuters poll.
Myanmar: Aung San Suu Kyi is to hear the first verdict in one
of several court cases against her brought by the military
regime.

Nov 29, 18:10

Peter Wells in New York

CDC expands guidelines to urge all US
adults to get Covid-19 booster jab
The top public health agency in the US expanded its
recommendation for Covid-19 booster shots, underscoring the
risks of a resurgence of cases and the new Omicron variant to
efforts to control the pandemic.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said on
Monday it was “strengthening” its recommendation on booster
doses and that “everyone ages 18 and older should get a booster
shot” six months after the completion of their initial Moderna
or BioNTech/Pfizer doses or two months after a Johnson &
Johnson jab.

“The recent emergence of the Omicron variant (B.1.1.529)
further emphasises the importance of vaccination, boosters,
and prevention efforts needed to protect against Covid-19,”
Rochelle Walensky, CDC director, said in a statement. She
again urged the 47m Americans who were not yet vaccinated to
sign up for their first jab.
In early November, the CDC endorsed Moderna and
BioNTech/Pfizer booster shots for all adults, with an advisory
panel to the agency unanimously recommending that everyone
over the age of 50 should go for their additional jab.

Nov 29, 18:06

Colby Smith in New York

Covid-19 resurgence poses downside risk to
US economy, Powell says

US Treasury secretary Janet Yellen attends a Senate committee meeting in September © Al Drago via
Reuters

Rising Covid-19 cases and the new Omicron variant threaten to
imperil the economic recovery and exacerbate inflationary
pressures, Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell is set to tell US
lawmakers on Tuesday.
In testimony to be delivered at a joint congressional hearing
with Treasury secretary Janet Yellen, Powell acknowledged the
underlying strength of the world’s largest economy as consumer
demand remains buoyant and people return to the workforce.
However, he also underscored the vast uncertainty clouding the
outlook, owing to possible pandemic-related setbacks.

“The recent rise in Covid-19 cases and the emergence of the
Omicron variant pose downside risks to employment and
economic activity and increased uncertainty for inflation,” he
said in prepared remarks released on Monday. “Greater
concerns about the virus could reduce people’s willingness to
work in person, which would slow progress in the labour
market and intensify supply-chain disruptions.”
Powell, who was recently appointed to a second term by US
President Joe Biden, is set to testify at a tenuous moment for
the US economy, which is grappling with the highest rates of
inflation in roughly 30 years.

Nov 29, 18:05

Naomi Rovnick in London, William Langley in Hong Kong and Nicholas
Megaw in New York

Rebound in tech stocks helps Nasdaq 100
recoup Friday’s decline
US stocks partially recovered on Monday after news of the
Omicron coronavirus variant triggered a sharp sell-off late last
week, as investors settled in for a renewed period of uncertainty
over the pandemic.
Wall Street’s benchmark S&P 500 index gained 1.3 per cent,
after falling 2.3 per cent in a truncated trading session on
Friday.

Technology stocks, which were some of the biggest winners
during earlier phases of the pandemic, led the gains again on
Monday. The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite index rose 1.9 per
cent, while the Nasdaq 100 index of the largest companies on
the exchange rose 2.3 per cent, reversing all of Friday’s losses.
Analysts cautioned that markets would remain volatile,
however, as investors awaited more information on the
potential of the new variant to alter the path of economic
growth.
The yield on the US benchmark 10-year Treasury note, which
rises when prices fall, rose 0.03 percentage points to 1.51 per
cent. Friday had marked its sharpest price increase since March
2020 as investors sought “haven” assets.
The euro fell 0.3 per cent against the dollar to $1.128 after
nations across the EU issued travel restrictions.
The Vix, a measure of expected volatility of the S&P 500,
declined from its highest level since March but remained
slightly elevated at a reading of 23. Its average over the long run
is about 20.

Read more about the day’s market moves.

