FT PROFESSIONAL

Equities

Markets decline on US interest rate concerns
Federal Reserve minutes show central bankers’ uncertainty over pace and timing of cuts

Stock markets fell after the US Federal Reserve released minutes from its January rate-setting meeting © FT Montage

Arjun Neil Alim in Hong Kong
Published FEB 20 2025

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
Stock markets fell on Thursday as investors took profits from Asian technology shares and US
central bank minutes highlighted uncertainty over the pace and timing of further interest rate cuts.
Hong Kong’s Hang Seng Tech index, a benchmark of China’s largest technology companies listed in
the territory, was down as much as 3.6 per cent on Thursday before recovering to a 2.2 per cent
decline.
Japan’s Topix fell 1.2 per cent, while the mainland Chinese CSI 300 retreated 0.4 per cent.

The falls partly reflected profit-taking after a rally in Chinese tech stocks on the back of advances
by artificial intelligence start-up DeepSeek, said analysts.
The Hang Seng Tech index had advanced as much as 28 per cent year to date until Wednesday, far
outpacing the US Nasdaq Composite’s 4 per cent gain.
“China is seeing big downs,” said Xin-Yao Ng, investment director for Asia-Pacific equities at
Abrdn. “It’s mostly about profit-taking in tech. It’s been a very narrow tech rally and [we’re] now
seeing some cautiousness.”
Analysts said tech investors were stepping back in advance of results from companies including
Alibaba, JD.com and Trip.com.
“This week we have several big internet companies reporting results. Investors will be listening
very closely to see management provide a bit more clarity on the AI vision,” said Jason Lui, head of
Asia-Pacific equities and derivatives strategy at BNP Paribas.
The falls also came after the US Federal Reserve released minutes from its January rate-setting
meeting in which officials said they wanted to see “further progress on inflation” before making
more rate cuts.
US interest rates remaining higher for longer reduces the headroom for other central banks to
lower rates to stimulate their economies. It also supports the dollar, thus sucking in capital from
the rest of the world.
The S&P 500 index inched higher on Wednesday, closing up 0.2 per cent, while the Nasdaq
Composite was flat.
The market drops in Asia also came amid concern over further export duties. Trump said on
Tuesday he planned to levy tariffs on US imports of cars, semiconductors and pharmaceuticals.
“There is ongoing concern about tariffs [from President Trump] . . . and [rates] have been an
overhang as the Asian central banks do not have room to cut rates,” said Ng of Abrdn.

The yen strengthened 0.6 per cent against the dollar, making it the best-performing major
currency on Thursday.
The South Korean won and Singapore dollar also strengthened 0.3 per cent and 0.2 per cent,
respectively, against the US currency.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Currencies
Equities
Arjun Neil Alim

