FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion The FT View

The Fed is stuck between its dual mandate
A cautious rate cut this week would maintain the US central bank’s flexibility

THE EDITORIAL BOARD

Fed chair Jay Powell. Some Fed officials argue that tariffs will deliver only a one-off boost to the price level, but there is a risk that
they fuel broader inflationary pressures © Al Drago/Bloomberg

The editorial board
Published SEP 15 2025

At its meeting starting on Tuesday, the US Federal Reserve is widely expected to cut interest rates
for the first time this year. But the central bank must balance its dual mandate to promote
maximum employment and keep prices stable, while withstanding growing pressure from Donald
Trump to make a “big cut”. At its two-day gathering, the most dovish committee members are set
to echo the US president’s calls for a chunky rate reduction in response to slowing job growth. Yet
with inflation climbing to 2.9 per cent in August, the case for caution is stronger.

Since the Fed’s last meeting in July, the debate has tilted in rate-cutters’ favour. The central bank’s
latest Beige Book reported that “most of the 12 Federal Reserve Districts reported little or no
change in economic activity” over the summer. Consumer confidence slid in September.
Construction and manufacturing activity has also been subdued, squeezed by high borrowing costs
and Trump’s wide-ranging import duties. Resilience has come from narrow sources, including
booming investment in artificial intelligence-related infrastructure.
The broad-based economic slowdown is showing up in a cooling labour market. For several
months, more private-sector industries have been shedding jobs than creating them. While the
jobless rate remains low, it has edged higher over the year, and could rise faster as workers struggle
to find suitable roles. Job-finding expectations fell to a record low in the New York Fed’s consumer
survey for August. That said, large data revisions and the administration’s clampdown on foreign
workers have muddied the statistics somewhat.
A substantive rate cut would give strained households and industries a welcome relief. But inflation
complicates matters. Trump’s tariffs are gradually raising domestic price pressures. Annual core
personal consumption expenditure inflation — the Fed’s preferred gauge — has risen since April.
The proportion of goods and services with rising prices has also gone up sharply.
Some Fed officials argue that tariffs will deliver only a one-off boost to the price level. But there is a
risk that they fuel broader inflationary pressures. US inflation has been above the central bank’s 2
per cent target for over four years now, and consumers’ year-ahead price growth expectations are
at 4.8 per cent, according to the University of Michigan’s survey. Grocers and major retailers warn
that they will increasingly have to pass through higher tariff costs to consumers as their inventories
dwindle. The White House is also mulling further sector-specific tariffs.
What should the Fed do? On balance, while weakness in the jobs market is concerning, the
uncertainty around inflation leaves little justification for a substantial easing this week. Markets
are pricing in a smaller 25 basis point cut — a move that seems sensible. Fed chair Jay Powell
should also stress the uncertainties still clouding the outlook.

At its subsequent meetings, the Fed will be better positioned to weigh the risks to its dual mandate
and act more decisively — whether that means accelerating cuts, pausing them, or even reversing
course. The coming months will bring more clarity on the extent of tariff pass-through to prices
and the depth of labour market weakness. The US Supreme Court’s deliberations on the legality of
the president’s tariffs will have significant implications for monetary policy too.
A cautious move this week will preserve the Fed’s flexibility in a volatile economic environment,
and reinforce its inflation-fighting credibility, as it comes under concerted pressure from the
president. For now, patience not panic appears to be the most prudent path.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
The editorial board
The FT View
Global inflation
US economy
US interest rates

