FT PROFESSIONAL

Chris Giles on Central Banks Central banks

The Fed’s battle against inflation is almost complete
Disinflation is evident, however you look at the price statistics

Those inside the Federal Reserve can almost celebrate the defeat of inflation © Reuters

Chris Giles
Published JAN 30 2024

This article is an on-site version of our Chris Giles on Central Banks newsletter. Sign up here to
get the newsletter sent straight to your inbox every Tuesday

This is the second week of major central bank monetary policy meetings. There have been no
moves so far and none expected from the Federal Reserve tomorrow or the Bank of England on
Thursday. As the chart below on Tokyo’s inflation rate in January shows, central bankers’ words
can age quickly and badly. I’d love to hear your thoughts on which statements from central bank
officials have been undermined most rapidly by brutal reality. And don’t say “transitory inflation”,
that took at least four months. Email me: chris.giles@ft.com

Almost there . . .
In the US, officials must feel they are almost within touching distance of “immaculate disinflation”,
the elimination of rapidly rising prices without an economic downturn or any meaningful rise in
unemployment.
Over the past week, the inflation data has been encouraging and the US economy expanded at an
annualised rate of 3.3 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2023 (for the benefit of most of the rest of
the world and headline writers everywhere, this irritating American growth reporting convention
translates to a quarterly growth rate of 0.8 per cent). Before Fed officials went into their “blackout
period” you could sense the anticipation of good news with titles to speeches such as Fed governor,
Chris Waller’s, “almost as good as it gets . . . but will it last?”
Depositors, borrowers and investors want to know where US official interest rates are heading.
Last week, I said that you should trust the Federal Open Market Committee’s projection that there
would be three rate cuts this year unless inflation was materially better than the FOMC’s December
2023 summary of economic projections or economic prospects were significantly worse. With only
good news coming from the real side of the economy, this week I will take a closer look at the US
inflation figures published on Friday.
The figures to watch are the personal consumption expenditure deflator figures (PCE) preferred by
the FOMC to the consumer price index (CPI) measure because officials think they are more
comprehensive, more consistent over long periods and reflect more timely household spending
patterns.

So that we don’t commit bucket or time crime, below is a table of US annualised PCE inflation over
different measures and time periods. The idea of putting a whole bunch of inflation measures in
one table came from Professor Jason Furman of the Harvard Kennedy School, although I’ve made
slightly different methodological choices. I’ve also added the weight of each inflation measure so
you can see how much of the whole index is excluded. All errors are mine.
Look first at the 12-month figures — these are the normal year-on-year comparisons that tell you
how much prices have changed in the past year. The Fed will be pleased that the core rate,
excluding food and energy, has fallen below 3 per cent in December. But as Martin Sandbu
explained last week, these 12-month figures often tell you as much about what was happening a
year ago than more recently. It is therefore worthwhile to look at more recent periods, but
annualising the change in prices so they are comparable with the 12-month numbers.
Look at the blue summary median of all other measures and on one-month, three-month and sixmonth annualised bases. PCE inflation is down to 2 per cent or below on each. For sure it is higher
on a few underlying measures, especially the Dallas Fed trimmed mean measure and the Cleveland
Fed median inflation measure (which both tend to be a bit laggy), but we can conclude that
inflation has hit the Fed’s 2 per cent over the past six months at least.

US inflation is under control
December 2023 annualised PCE inflation for different categories and various time horizons

1m

3m

6m

12m

PCE
Weight

Headline

2.0

0.5

2.0

2.6

10

Core

2.0

1.5

1.9

2.9

88

Market based core

1.5

1.7

2.0

3.0

76

Core ex housing

1.0

0.3

1.0

2.2

73

Core services ex housing

3.0

2.0

2.7

3.3

Median PCE

2.6

2.8

3.1

3.8

Trimmed mean PCE

2.6

2.3

2.6

3.3

Median of measures

2.0

1.7

2.0

3.0

50

The question for rates is how these figures compare with the FOMC’s summary of economic
projections. The answer is very well indeed. Compared with the December forecasts (when most of
the data was already available), a quarter of the FOMC thought headline inflation would have been
higher in the fourth quarter of 2023 and none thought it would be lower. More than 40 per cent of
the committee forecast a higher core rate of inflation over the same period and, again, none
thought price pressures would be weaker.

5

The data for December, of course, tells us nothing about 2024, except that better than expected
inflation performance at the end of 2023 might continue. The FOMC will therefore have seen
evidence that is reassuring, but probably not enough yet to signal a March rate cut or a change in
view in the appropriate number of rate cuts this year. That might be obvious by the March 20
meeting.
If you liked the table above, but thought, “I wonder how these figures have moved over the past
year or so”, they are all in the chart below. But do look also at the shaded minimum and maximum
values — these show the broad swath of US inflation measures all falling back to target.

The comprehensive picture of US disinflation
Annualised inflation (%)
Enter series to show
Max
Min
Headline 12m
Core services ex housing 12m

Core 12m
Market based core 12m
Core ex housing 12m
Median PCE 12m
Trimmed mean PCE 12m

8

6

4

With disinflation clearly a feature of the US economy, it is worth thinking what is preventing the
Fed cutting the federal funds immediately. The four following reasons are likely to feature.

1 Strong growth. With expansion at a year-on-year rate of 3.1 per cent in the
fourth quarter, the US economy performed better than every FOMC
member expected as recently as the December 2023 economic projections.
The highest forecast on December 13 was 2.7 per cent. It would be a brave
period to base monetary policy decisions on current growth rates since the
link between economic performance and inflation has been catastrophic of
late, but strong growth is a good excuse temporarily to do nothing.

2 Uncertainty. As I wrote a few weeks back, the Fed thinks the world is
unusually uncertain, so is likely to want to wait before taking a big decision.

3 Reversal risk. Last week’s newsletter highlighted how central bankers hate a
U-turn. This delays action.

4 Low costs of waiting. Since there are few signs of pain in the US economy, it
is reasonable for officials to say the cost of delay in cutting rates is low. This
is entirely valid.

A dovish European Central Bank?
The ECB last week left its interest rates on hold with a statement almost identical to that in
December. Christine Lagarde said: “The disinflation process is at work.” I am not going to engage
in a lengthy textual analysis of her words (or those of the multiple national central bank governors
who have spoken since the meeting) because it is pretty pointless.
Instead, the ECB emphasised data dependency, so it is clear that a reasonable central expectation
would be that it starts to cut rates around June. Earlier action is not ruled out and would come if
there was sufficiently good news on inflation, signs of more rapidly slowing wage growth or bad
news on economic activity.
As the chart below shows, the ECB’s meeting itself was viewed in forward interest rate markets as a
little dovish, but the much bigger move has been a realisation by market participants that they
became too excited about quick and deep rate cuts over the Christmas period.

Expectations of eurozone interest rates did not move much last week
ECB deposit rate, EURIBOR 3m-futures (%)
Deposit rate

Now

One week ago

One month ago

4

3

2

What I’ve been reading and watching
Your views on whether Christine Lagarde was correct and wise to have a
pop at economists interested me all week. My summary of them is that you
are quite evenly split on whether her comments were correct although the
intensity of feeling among supporters was stronger. People were more
reluctant to say whether her words were wise.

At the Peterson Institute, David Wilcox, former lead economic forecaster at
the Fed, gives a candid assessment of what the US central bank got wrong
recently (too rigid foreword guidance, mostly). But he said the pandemic
period was so unusual, central banks should not rush into changing their
forecasting or inflation-fighting frameworks.
The UK’s Bank of England and Treasury published responses to their
consultation on a “digital pound”, the UK’s proposed central bank digital
currency. There were more than 50,000 responses and privacy was one of
the most often cited concerns. The authorities’ answer was a series of
guarantees. Any digital pound would not be programmable to expire after a
certain date or contain conditional contracts such as limiting what it could
be used to purchase. It would be private (without being anonymous) and
designed to ensure people would always have a trusted payment
mechanism in future.
For the longevity of his reporting, the breadth of his canvas and comments
on central bank policies, John Plender’s lessons from 55 years of investing
is a must-read.

A chart that matters
Japan released figures for Tokyo’s inflation in January. These are an excellent predictor of the
national figures coming later in February. Headline and core inflation (excluding fresh food) fell
well below expectations in January and well below the Bank of Japan’s 2 per cent target. They
came three days after the BoJ said it was more confident than it had been that inflation would be
sustainable at its target level. Oh dear.

The Tokyo headline and excluding fresh food measures of inflation plunged
in January, signalling a coming fall in the wider Japan measures
Annual inflation rate (%)

4

3

Recommended newsletters for you
Free lunch — Your guide to the global economic policy debate. Sign up here
Trade Secrets — A must-read on the changing face of international trade and globalisation.
Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US inflation

US interest rates
Central banks
Federal Reserve
Chris Giles on Central Banks

