FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Global inflation

Central banks do not have the luxury of time in tackling inflation
New variants are a reminder that the US Fed and others are setting policy for an
uncertain world

MEGAN GREENE

A negative outcome from the omicron variant could stop people getting out and spending © Spencer Platt/Getty

Megan Greene
Published DEC 2 2021

The writer is a senior fellow at Harvard Kennedy School

It is hard not to pity those who must produce a macroeconomic outlook for 2022. The paths of
growth and inflation were already uncertain, and now there is the added unknown of the new
coronavirus variant, Omicron. The chief executive of Moderna told the FT that existing vaccines
are likely to be much less effective at tackling Omicron. The chief executive of BioNTech is more
sanguine and expects fully vaccinated people will face only moderate illness. The World Health
Organization says it’s possible the variant will be much more transmissible, but concurs that
vaccines should protect against severe cases. And those are the experts.
With time, we’ll know the answers. But the central bankers who meet this month don’t have the
luxury of time. The US Federal Reserve meets on December 14-15, the Bank of England and the
European Central Bank on December 16. Will Omicron be a drag on demand that requires
stimulus? Or a further boost to inflation that requires tighter monetary policy?
The best case is for Omicron to be so transmissible it becomes dominant, but causes only mild
cases with no long-term effects — evolving into a version of the seasonal flu. Another good outcome
would be that vaccines remain extremely effective and there are few breakthrough cases, which are
moderate. In either scenario, the central bankers’ base case — that inflation will peak next year as
supply chain disruptions abate — will probably prove correct.
Yet if the variant is transmissible enough to become dominant, causes severe illness and can
circumvent vaccines, the impact on global economies is certain to be strong, if unclear. People may
again stop going in to work. According to an August survey by The Conference Board, fear of
contracting Covid and fear of exposing a family member were respondents’ biggest concerns about
returning to the workplace. And this against a backdrop of freely available, highly effective
vaccines.
If workers stay at home because of the new variant, supply chain disruptions would be exacerbated
and prices could rise even faster, a consequence Fed Chair Jay Powell highlighted in congressional
testimony this week.

Yet the negative scenario could also result in much slower price increases. Even without a new
variant, the surge in demand experienced on reopening the economy is expected to ease. Real
incomes and personal savings have already reverted to pre-pandemic trend. Add to this a deadly
virus against which we have little to no protection, and there’s a strong likelihood people would
stop going out and spending money just as supply begins to increase next year.
Leaders in the US and Europe have vowed not to impose new lockdowns. But some may feel they
have no choice. Austria imposed a temporary lockdown before the Omicron variant emerged in
order to address an outbreak of the Delta variant. German hospitals already had a record caseload
of Delta before Omicron showed up.
Demand could crater even without lockdowns. According to research conducted by Austan
Goolsbee and Chad Syverson of the University of Chicago, a collapse in US travel in the spring and
winter of 2020 resulted more from voluntary behaviour changes than from government-mandated
lockdowns.
Given accelerating inflation in Europe and the US, it’s unlikely central banks will put the stimulus
pedal to the metal again. But will the variant temper their plans to slowly withdraw
accommodation? Even in the face of a collapse in demand, monetary policy kicks in with huge lags,
and a vaccine can be adapted for new variants in a matter of months.
Omicron will not bring us all the way back to the uncertainty of March 2020. But it is a warning
that however this variant shakes out, other mutations will almost certainly follow. You don’t really
have to pity the central bankers, but maybe cut them some slack.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Megan Greene
Global inflation

Covid-19
Medical science
Bank of England

