FT PROFESSIONAL

Chris Giles on Central Banks Federal Reserve

Everyone misunderstands Jay Powell

That is a problem for the Fed; plus a homily on the meaning of dovishness

Trust matters. Fed chair Jay Powell mentioned the importance of anchored inflation expectations eight times in his press conference
last week

Chris Giles
Published MAR 25 2025

This article is an on-site version of our Chris Giles on Central Banks newsletter. Premium
subscribers can sign up here to get the newsletter delivered every Tuesday. Standard
subscribers can upgrade to Premium here, or explore all FT newsletters

The headline reflects some rather interesting research about the Federal Reserve that shows how
difficult central banks find landing their expert and technical messages with the public.

For example, however hard Fed chair Jay Powell tries to say absolutely nothing controversial in a
polarised US, people often hear news mediated through a partisan outlet and take offence,
assuming he is speaking for the other side.
The research by Pei Kuang, Michael Weber and Shihan Xie sampled more than 5,000 people just
after Donald Trump was inaugurated in January. It finds that the public is not only extremely
polarised, but that this colours their view of the Fed. Democrats thought US inflation was moderate
in 2024 but expect it to be high in 2025; Republicans think the opposite.
As such the results are rather like the University of Michigan consumer sentiment index, below,
which shows consumer confidence is governed more by who is running the country than economic
events. This is troubling because economic surveys then become difficult to interpret.

US consumer sentiment tells you more about partisanship than the
economy
Index of consumer sentiment
Democrat

Independent

Republican

100

50

0
2016

Trump 1

2017

2018

Biden

2019

2020

2021

2022

Trump 2

2023

2024

2025

2026

2027

Source: University of Michiga

What is more difficult for the Fed is the public’s view about the institution’s impartiality and its
ability to take expert decisions. Some 66 per cent of people identifying as Democrats thought the
Fed was run by a bunch of Trump-loving Republicans and 60 per cent of Republicans thought the
Fed was a hotbed of woke Democrat lefties.
This means that most Americans are not inclined to trust the Fed. Interestingly, those identifying
as independents are not some non-partisan oasis of trust, but the most sceptical group of all. In
total, almost two-thirds of respondents thought the Fed was essentially out to get them.

Republicans think Fed officials are a bunch of Democrats and vice versa
Perceptions of the Fed’s political leaning by respondents’ political leaning (%)
Republican

Democrat

40

30

20

10

0

Strongly Democratic

Moderately Democratic

Closer to Democratic

Closer to

Source: Pei Kuang, Michael Weber, Shihan X

That result is not necessarily disastrous, since independent central banks are supposed to take
difficult decisions to foster low inflation and financial stability. The problem is that trust in the Fed
is governed by how much people think it is aligned with their thinking.
Trust matters. Powell mentioned the importance of anchored inflation expectations eight times in
his press conference last week. Success relies on people trusting the Fed will keep inflation low.
In 2023, European Central Bank President Christine Lagarde said trust was extremely important.
“Conveying our policy messages to the wider public is critical for the legitimacy of independent
central banks in democratic societies and for the effectiveness of monetary policy.”
The problem for the Fed is that those who thought the Fed was against them were much less
willing to trust it.

Those who felt politically aligned with the Fed were willing to trust it
%
Fed is one of them

Fed is one o

30

20

10

0

No trust

2

3

4

5

6

Full trust

No trust

Source: Pei Kuang, Michael Weber, Shihan X

The good news in the research is that when respondents were presented with basic information
about the appointment process at the Fed, its objectives or recent record, trust scores went up
significantly, as did the survey respondents’ perception of the Fed as an independent institution
acting in the interests of the US.
The bad news is that the survey participants were forced to consume this information. And the
research found that those who did not trust the Fed preferred partisan news sources rather than
factual information. So, however factual and impartial the Fed is, it has to reach people who prefer
to have their priors reinforced by partisan outlets.

I got in touch with one of the authors, Michael Weber at the University of Chicago. His conclusion:
“Communication can be successful in winning people over . . . [but] many consumers do not want
to learn about Fed policy.”

Well over half of respondents did not trust the Fed
(%)
Do not trust

Neutral

Trust

20

30

Trust in the Fed

0

10

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Source: Pei Kuang, Michael Weber, Shihan X

A sermon on hawkishness and dovishness
With apologies to anyone who has heard me bang on about this in the past, last week’s Fed meeting
stuffed my inbox with analysts disagreeing on whether the Fed had been hawkish, dovish or
neutral.

None of the people emailing me were idiots, but in describing economic events or data, anyone in
the communications game needs to answer one basic question. Is it big or small? In this case: is it
dovish or hawkish? And to do that you need a relevant comparison. You need to answer the
“relative to what?” question.
Given this framework, there are three relevant comparisons to last Wednesday.
Compared with the Fed’s December meeting, the decision and the summary of economic
projections were clearly hawkish. Growth was revised down and inflation revised up. Alongside
these contradictory moves, the centre of gravity in the Federal Open Market Committee shifted
towards expecting fewer rate cuts than previously, even though the view of the median FOMC
member was unchanged. Mostly, this came from some officials removing their view of rapid
interest rate cuts, as the chart below shows.

US Fed officials were more hawkish in March than in December
Each dot represents one FOMC participant's projection for the midpoint of US interest rates in Q4 of
each year (%)
2025

2026

2027

Dec
2024

Mar
2025
2.5

Source: Federal Reserve

3

3.5

4

4.5

Compared with financial market expectations, the meeting and forecasts were also hawkish. Before
the meeting, bond and interest rate futures markets expected roughly three rate cuts in 2025, but
Fed officials suggested a maximum of two. Given this, financial markets should have seen the
decision as hawkish, but weirdly took the meeting as dovish. There is an inconsistency here. Never
mind.
Compared with a view that tariffs made rate cuts impossible, the meeting was clearly dovish, since
the Fed still signalled two rate cuts as most likely this year.
The meeting was therefore either hawkish and dovish depending on the relevant comparison.
Before pronouncing, you need to articulate your frame of reference.
Here endeth my sermon.

What I’ve been reading and watching
Read Barry Eichengreen’s Saturday essay questioning whether the dollar
can remain king of the currencies. No one can ever say a straight “no” to
this question, but Eichengreen comes close and melds wonderful history
and facts doing so.
So desperate is everyone to think there is some grand plan behind Trump’s
economic policy that there has been an explosion of Mar-a-Lago Accord
explainers (even though a plan does not even exist). To save yourself the
trouble of many takes, read Martin Wolf’s two-part series. The first lays out
the theory. The second, publishing as this newsletter goes out, Martin
promises will trash it.
President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s detention of his political rival shows
where authoritarian tendencies lead. It is also bad for Turkey’s economic
prospects.

If you want to know roughly what will be in the UK’s Spring Statement on
Wednesday, I wrote about it in a column last week.

A chart that matters
Younger employees are twice as likely to be using artificial intelligence at work than their older
colleagues, the European Central Bank reported last week. Regardless of age, attitudes towards AI
were overwhelmingly positive, especially among those who used it.
The Bundesbank also highlighted last week that artificial intelligence was pretty good at tracking
dovish and hawkish statements from the European Central Bank (see chart below). It does not
reflect a dovish bias at the bank, but an appropriate dovish outlook when inflation was below target
in the 2010s and more hawkish noises before the ECB started raising rates.

Bundesbank hawk-o-meter for monetary policy speeches and ECB press
conferences
Index of hawkishness
Type

Speeches by ECB executive board

ECB press conferences

↑ Hawkish
↑
Hawkish
0.5

0

-0.5

↓ Dovish
↓
Dovish

-1
2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

202

Source: Bundesban

The even better news is that my colleagues and I over at the FT’s Monetary Policy Radar
independently undertook a very similar analysis in December last year and got consistent results.
AI is proficient at reading and synthesising a large amount of information. Chapeau to the robots.

The European Central Bank Hawks-Doves scale
0 = Dovish; 0.5 = Neutral; 1 = Hawkish
Trend line is a trailing moving average over last 10 speeches (excluding speeches unrelated to monetary policy)
1

<- Dovish — Hawkish ->

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024
Source: BIS, ECB
FT graphic: Joel Sus

Recommended newsletters for you
Free Lunch — Your guide to the global economic policy debate. Sign up here
The Lex Newsletter — Lex, our investment column, breaks down the week’s key themes, with
analysis by award-winning writers. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
US economy
Central banks
Federal Reserve
Jerome H. Powell

