FT PROFESSIONAL

Federal Reserve

Most Federal Reserve officials back slower rate rises ‘soon’
Policymakers prepare for ‘downshift’ to 0.5 percentage point increase but warn of more pain to come

Minutes from the Fed’s November meeting showed that a ‘substantial majority’ of officials backed slowing the pace of interest rate
rises © Jason Reed/Reuters

Colby Smith in Washington and Harriet Clarfelt in New York
Published NOV 23 2022 | Updated NOV 23 2022, 16:46

A “substantial majority” of Federal Reserve officials support slowing down the pace of interest rate
rises soon, even as some warned that monetary policy would need to be tightened more than
expected next year, according to an account of their most recent meeting.
Minutes from the November meeting, at which the Fed raised its benchmark rate by 0.75
percentage points for the fourth time in a row, suggested officials are committed to ploughing
ahead with their campaign to stamp out elevated inflation.

However, the account also signalled that officials are prepared to start raising rates in smaller
increments while they assess the economic effect of the most aggressive tightening campaign in
decades.
“A slower pace in these circumstances would better allow the committee to assess progress toward
its goals of maximum employment and price stability,” according to the minutes.
The account, released on Wednesday, showed some Fed officials believe they will have to squeeze
the economy more than they initially expected because inflation had shown “little sign thus far of
abating” — even if they get there with smaller rate rises. A few also argued it could be
“advantageous” to wait to slow the pace of rises until the policy rate was “more clearly in restrictive
territory” and that there were clearer signals inflation was slowing.
However, in a sign of divisions among policymakers, others warned there was a risk that the
cumulative effect of rate rises could “exceed what was required” to bring inflation under control.
The release of the Fed minutes gave further impetus to US stocks. The S&P 500 ended the session
up 0.6 per cent, while the technology-heavy Nasdaq Composite gained 1 per cent.

In government bond markets, the yield on the 10-year US Treasury note, seen as a proxy for global
borrowing costs, slipped 0.06 percentage points to 3.7 per cent. The policy-sensitive two-year yield
fell 0.04 percentage points to 4.48 per cent. Both yields, which move inversely to the debt
instruments’ prices, had been broadly flat in the lead-up to the publication of the minutes.
The dollar extended its declines in New York afternoon trading, losing 0.9 per cent against a
basket of six peers.
Following the most recent rate decision, the federal funds rate now hovers between 3.75 per cent
and 4 per cent, a level that top officials say will begin to more directly curb demand and damp
consumer spending.
Because rate rises take time to feed through to the economy, Fed policymakers have proposed
“downshifting” to half-point rate rises as soon as the next meeting in December, when their
campaign to tighten monetary policy will enter a new phase.

According to the minutes, officials engaged in a long debate about the delayed effects of tighter
monetary policy. They noted that interest rate-sensitive sectors such as housing had adjusted
quickly, but that the “timing of the effects on overall economic activity, the labour market, and
inflation was still quite uncertain”.
At a press conference earlier this month, chair Jay Powell said the level at which the fed funds rate
tops out will surpass the 4.6 per cent level expected by most Fed officials just a couple of months
ago.
His warning of a higher “terminal rate” came amid mounting evidence that price pressures are
becoming embedded in a broader range of goods and services even as the pace of consumer price
growth eases.
Many policymakers have since said that the fed funds rate will need to rise above 5 per cent at least
in order to bring inflation back to the Fed’s 2 per cent target. They have also pledged to keep
interest rates at a level they consider “sufficiently restrictive” for an extended period until they are
confident the economy is starting to cool down as hoped.
According to the minutes, economists at the Fed judged the possibility of a recession over the next
year was “almost as likely” as their baseline prediction that the world’s largest economy will
narrowly avoid one.
The minutes also indicated heightened concern about financial stability risks associated with the
Fed’s plans to rapidly increase borrowing costs, citing recent ructions in UK government bond
markets that forced the Bank of England to step in.
However, investors continue to be sceptical about the Fed’s commitment to pressing ahead with
monetary tightening, especially as economic data becomes increasingly mixed. Despite
protestations from central bank officials, market participants expect the US economy to tip into a
recession next year, forcing the Fed to slash interest rates.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US economy
US inflation
US interest rates
Federal Reserve
US

