FT PROFESSIONAL

Markets Briefing Equities

US stocks stabilise while Treasury sell-off continues following Fed minutes
Central bank signals aggressive interest-rate rise to combat inflation

After the Fed raised its benchmark interest rate by 0.25 percentage points last month, ‘many’ policymakers viewed one or more halfpoint increases as appropriate if inflation remained elevated © Stefani Reynolds/AFP/Getty Images

Kate Duguid in New York and Naomi Rovnick and George Steer in London
Published APR 7 2022 | Updated APR 7 2022, 16:11

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
US stocks steadied on Thursday, stanching the large losses incurred the previous day after the
release of minutes from the Federal Reserve’s March meeting that detailed officials’ willingness to
tighten policy aggressively to combat inflation.

Wall Street’s benchmark S&P 500 stock index ended Thursday up 0.4 per cent, having closed the
previous session 1 per cent lower. The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite, which fell 2.2 per cent on
Wednesday, rose 0.1 per cent.
Europe’s regional Stoxx 600 share index fell 0.2 per cent after ending Wednesday 1.5 per cent
lower, on concerns that the European Central Bank would follow the Fed’s rapid monetary policy
tightening. Also rattling markets were fears that sanctions against Russia could stoke higher
consumer prices. Germany’s Dax slipped 0.5 per cent while London’s FTSE 100 lost 0.5 per cent.
The Fed minutes detailed plans to shrink its $9tn balance sheet, part of an effort to fight inflation.
The minutes also showed that “many” policymakers viewed one or more half-point increases as
appropriate if inflation remained elevated, after the Fed had raised its benchmark interest rate by
0.25 percentage points last month.
The annual pace of consumer price increases in the US soared to a 40-year high of 7.9 per cent in
February.
“The Fed believes it is behind the curve. I think they have admitted now that they are behind the
curve, and now they’re coming out swinging,” said Jack Ablin, chief investment officer at Cresset
Wealth Advisors.
In spite of that, Ablin said: “The market is taking the news relatively well. Given where rates are
currently, the stock market should be down more than it is year-to-date. There is a gradual
acceptance in the equity world of what the rates market already believes.”
The yield on the 10-year Treasury note continued its rise, up 0.04 percentage points to 2.64 per
cent, having earlier reached a three-year high. A fierce sell-off in US government debt, in
anticipation of the Fed’s balance sheet reduction, has lifted yields across maturities this week. The
30-year yield also reached a three-year high.
Bond yields move inversely to their prices.
The yield on the policy-sensitive two-year Treasury note declined 0.02 percentage points to 2.44
per cent, but remained close to its highest point in more than three years.

Germany’s 10-year Bund yield edged 0.03 percentage points higher to 0.68 per cent as minutes of
the ECB’s latest meeting showed policymakers expected eurozone inflation to “remain above target
in 2023, with significant upside risks”.
Equity markets have found support so far, however, from investors switching out of bonds, where
inflation erodes the instruments’ fixed-income payments.
The Stoxx has fallen about 7 per cent this year but is trading above its closing price on February 23,
the eve of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Wall Street’s benchmark S&P 500 share index is about 6
per cent higher than its February 23 level.
“There is a rotation towards high-quality dividend paying stocks,” said Mobeen Tahir, director of
macroeconomic research at ETF provider WisdomTree, adding that companies can potentially
safeguard earnings by passing on price increases to customers.
Brent crude, the international oil benchmark, settled 0.48 per cent higher at $100.58 a barrel, after
falling below $100 a barrel intraday for the first time since mid-March. Oil prices had fallen on
Wednesday after the International Energy Agency said its members would tap emergency
stockpiles to counter price increases from potential further bans on Russian crude imports.
In Asia, Hong Kong’s Hang Seng share index fell 1.2 per cent and Japan’s Nikkei lost 1.6 per cent,
mirroring declines on Wall Street in the previous session.

Unhedged — Markets, finance and strong opinion
Robert Armstrong dissects the most important market trends and discusses how Wall Street’s
best minds respond to them. Sign up here to get the newsletter sent straight to your inbox every
weekday

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US Treasury bonds
Bonds
US equities
Equities
Federal Reserve

