FT PROFESSIONAL

Markets Briefing Equities

Wall Street stocks gain as investors take heart from Fed minutes
Oil prices retreat on downbeat US business surveys and worries over China

The S&P 500 index closed 0.6 per cent higher © Brendan McDermid/Reuters

Harriet Clarfelt in New York and George Steer in London
Published NOV 23 2022 | Updated NOV 23 2022, 16:30

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
Wall Street stocks closed higher on Wednesday after minutes from the Federal Reserve’s latest
policy meeting suggested the US central bank could ease up on its push to lift interest rates.
The S&P 500 index ended the session up 0.6 per cent, while the technology-heavy Nasdaq
Composite gained 1 per cent after finishing the previous day 1.4 per cent higher.

Those moves came as minutes of the US central bank’s early November meeting showed a
“substantial majority” of officials supported slowing down the pace of interest rate rises soon —
even as some warned that monetary policy would need to be tightened more than expected next
year.
In government bond markets, the yield on the 10-year US Treasury note — seen as a proxy for
global borrowing costs — slipped 0.06 percentage points to 3.7 per cent. The policy-sensitive twoyear yield fell 0.03 percentage points to 4.48 per cent. Both yields, which move inversely to the
debt instruments’ prices, had been broadly flat in the lead-up to the publication of the minutes.
The dollar fell further after the release of the minutes, with an index tracking the US currency
against six peers sliding 0.9 per cent.
Equities and bonds have come under pressure this year as the Fed and its international peers turn
the screws on monetary policy in a bid to curb rapid price growth. Even after a softer-thanexpected US inflation reading for October, markets are pricing in expectations of interest rates in
the world’s largest economy peaking at about 5 per cent in June.
After four consecutive increases of 0.75 percentage points, the Fed’s “target range” for benchmark
interest rates stands at 3.75 per cent to 4 per cent.
Elsewhere on Wednesday, oil prices were lower, with international benchmark Brent crude down
4.1 per cent at just under $85 a barrel.
The fresh falls for oil came as concerns about global demand were highlighted by a disappointing
US purchasing managers’ report. The S&P Global US composite PMI for November, which takes
into account the services and factory sectors, reached a three-month low of 46.3, suggesting the
pace at which business conditions are deteriorating is worsening.
“Business conditions across the US worsened in November . . . with output and demand falling at
increased rates, consistent with the economy contracting at an annualised rate of 1 per cent,” said
Chris Williamson, chief business economist at S&P Global Market Intelligence.

PMI reports for the euro area also pointed to a continued slowdown in business activity. “The
[eurozone] data suggests the outlook has marginally improved and some tail risks are less likely,
but is still consistent with a meaningful recession,” Barclays said in a note to clients.

The reports come as analysts remain concerned about China, which is launching large-scale
lockdowns as it battles outbreaks of Covid-19.
Europe’s Stoxx 600 share index closed up 0.6 per cent. In Asia, Hong Kong’s Hang Seng index
edged up 0.6 per cent, while China’s CSI 300 added 0.1 per cent. Elsewhere, South Korea’s Kospi
gained 0.5 per cent.
Willem Sels, global chief investment officer at HSBC’s private bank, said he was bearish on equities
in general but recently “dipped into” Chinese retail, hospitality and airline stocks on the
expectation of further support for the country’s battered real estate sector and a gradual relaxing of
zero-Covid policies in the second quarter of 2023.

If implemented, the measures would lower the chances of a full-blown property crisis and
stimulate economic growth, Sels added. “Couple that with very attractive valuations, and other
investors being underweight, and [China] is a good risk-reward.”

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US equities
Equities
Markets
Markets Briefing
Harriet Clarfelt

