FT PROFESSIONAL

Unhedged US

Inflation, still scary
The hole in the soft landing story

© Financial Times

Ethan Wu
Published AUG 8 2023

This article is an on-site version of our Unhedged newsletter. Sign up here to get the newsletter
sent straight to your inbox every weekday

Good morning. Ethan here; Rob returns tomorrow. Is all the good news priced in already? So far
this earnings season, the median price reaction to an earnings beat has looked limp versus history,
according to Morgan Stanley. One notable exception: Berkshire Hathaway, which rose 3.4 per cent
after Saturday’s earnings, and after Unhedged wrote that Berkshire probably can’t sustainably beat
the S&P 500. Readers can decide which seems the likelier catalyst. Email me: ethan.wu@ft.com.

Base effects and the inflation threat
Here is a dumb point about inflation “base effects” that’s nonetheless easy to mix up. Inflation is a
rate of change, so the denominator you choose to measure it with makes a big difference. The two
standard methods are month-over-month and year-over-year comparisons. What’s tricky is that
you can have flat monthly rates alongside rising annual rates. Whatever happened to prices a year
ago ripples over to today.
Though this point is fiddly, it matters. Because the sharpest inflation increases happened in the
first half of 2022, annual comparisons for the rest of this year’s CPI reports will be boosted by more
slowly rising denominators. The dominant soft-landing market narrative is anchored in part by the
pretty little 3-handle on current headline annual inflation. If this starts rising, even if it reflects a
tame monthly rate, investors could begin doubting their assumptions about how immaculate
disinflation will be.
This basic point is made in a recent post by Rob Arnott and Omid Shakernia of Research Affiliates.
Earlier in the year, they forecast “an illusion of tumbling inflation in the first half of the year,
perhaps even falling below 3 per cent by mid-year, then an illusion of soaring inflation in the
second half of the year”, driven by shifting base effects. They illustrate why in the chart below, first
published in January. The orange line shows how high annual inflation could conceivably rise,
assuming flat monthly CPI readings at 46 basis points (the 2020-23 average). The green line shows
the lower bound, with monthly readings at zero throughout 2023:

A 46bp monthly print is unlikely, as Arnott and Shakernia concede. (The 2023 monthly average so
far is 27bp.) Even still, they think year-over-year headline inflation could finish the year in the
range of 4-5 per cent, starting with Thursday’s July CPI report. From their post:

Suppose, for example, that we see an average of 20-40 basis points of
inflation each month through year-end. Then we should see the year-overyear inflation rise to somewhere between 4% and 5½% by year-end. That’s
enough to be alarming to most observers, who are typically not paying
attention to the low rates of inflation that we are replacing late 2022.

We find it a bit amusing that, if inflation finishes the year at half its peak
levels of mid-2022, this will be an adverse shock to many (indeed, likely
most) investors. If we finish the year at 4½% inflation, we will be pleased by
this usually benign denouement following a dangerous inflationary surge,
but most of the investment community, media, and political elite will likely
be alarmed (fear sells!).
Research Affiliates is not the only shop thinking about this. Bank of America’s chart below received
a good deal of attention back in July. It shows where yearly inflation would go assuming a few
different flat monthly rates (the chart is misleading; more on that below):

Omair Sharif of Inflation Insights has a beef with BofA. Their chart’s title suggests that any
monthly inflation reading above 20bp would push up annual headline rates. That would seem a
low bar, raising fears of a base effects-driven inflation resurgence. But Sharif points out that BofA
misleadingly uses non-seasonally adjusted monthly rates. If you use more conventional seasonally
adjusted numbers instead, base effects look much less threatening. The real bar for monthly rates
creating inflation re-acceleration is more like 40bp. Here is Sharif’s redo of BofA’s chart:

Base effects should be easy enough to ignore in the next few months because, as Carl Riccadonna,
chief US economist at BNP Paribas, pointed out to me yesterday, “when we talk about base effects
we’re basically talking about energy base effects”. Watching core inflation, even in year-over-year
terms (currently at 4.9 per cent), will probably give you a better idea of where inflation is heading.
But in general, “for the next couple months, you shouldn’t be too focused on the year on year
trend”, he added.

So, all good then? Not entirely. Rather than a sharp inflation rebound, the problem is if inflation
settles in at an uncomfortably high rate. Over the next couple months, we will probably see
encouraging monthly core inflation readings around 20bp, thanks to disinflation in shelter and
used cars. But Sharif thinks the next 12 months will look more like core inflation pinging between
20bp and 30bp, somewhere between the high-2s and 4 per cent in annualised terms. Over at The
Overshoot, Matt Klein makes the case that it’ll look more like 4:

Without a downturn, it is unclear whether (or why) wage growth would
decelerate enough from here to bring inflation all the way back to the Fed’s
2% yearly goal over any reasonable timeframe . . .
The main reason to worry is that nominal wages have consistently been
rising about 5%-6% a year since last summer . . . Since consumer spending
tracks wage growth better than anything else, real volumes of goods and
services would have to rise about 3%-4% a year for the current pace of wage
increases to be consistent with 2% inflation. That would certainly be my
preference, and there are good reasons to think that productivity might
accelerate, but the likelier outcome is that underlying inflation is closer to
4% than 2%.
This is the hole in the soft landing story: persistently high wage growth sustaining consumer
spending. In lieu of slower wage growth, falling prices may just increase consumer purchasing
power, lifting demand in a way that, ultimately, shows up as higher prices.
Sharif gives a vivid example from the used-car market, in principle one of the most rate-sensitive
parts of the economy. In the last six months of 2022, used-car prices fell steadily. Then, in January,
demand popped. Driven by lower prices (and substitution from new cars), retail used-car sales shot
up 10 per cent in just one month. The surge in demand “caught all the dealers off guard”, forcing
them to rush to wholesale auctions, says Sharif. Three months later, that mad dash showed up in
inflation. The used cars and trucks CPI sub-index rose more than 4 per cent in April and May.

Used cars are an especially dramatic category, and probably unrepresentative. But the point is that
inflation can only fall as far as consumer spending lets it. The inflation threat to markets has not
gone away.

One good read
A very nice book review considers the gap between George Orwell’s rhetoric and his life.

FT Unhedged podcast
Can’t get enough of Unhedged? Listen to our
new podcast, hosted by Ethan Wu and Katie
Martin, for a 15-minute dive into the latest
markets news and financial headlines, twice a
week. Catch up on past editions of the
newsletter here.

Recommended newsletters for you
Swamp Notes — Expert insight on the intersection of money and power in US politics. Sign up
here
The Lex Newsletter — Lex is the FT’s incisive daily column on investment. Sign up for our
newsletter on local and global trends from expert writers in four great financial centres. Sign up
here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US economy
US inflation

Bank of America Corp
US
Unhedged

