FT PROFESSIONAL

US inflation

US inflation hits fastest annual pace since 1982
Consumer price index rises 6.8% in November, intensifying pressure on White House as it seeks support for
spending plan

Prices between October and November jumped 0.8%, slightly down from the previous month-on-month increase of 0.9% ©
Bloomberg

Colby Smith in New York
Published DEC 10 2021 | Updated DEC 10 2021, 13:21

US consumer prices increased at the fastest pace in nearly 40 years in November, piling more
political pressure on the Biden administration as it seeks support for a massive spending plan.
The consumer price index, published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics on Friday, rose 6.8 per cent
last month from a year ago — the fastest annual pace since 1982 and a significant pick-up from the
6.2 per cent rate in October.

Inflation has become a thorny political issue for the White House, weighing on President Joe
Biden’s approval ratings as well as the electoral prospects for his Democratic party during next
year’s midterm elections.
In a sign of his concern, Biden sought to play down the relevance of the latest data both ahead of
Friday’s announcement and in a statement afterwards, stressing that prices have fallen in recent
weeks for many of the sectors driving the bulk of the increase.
“Developments in the weeks after these data were collected last month show that price and cost
increases are slowing, although not as quickly as we’d like,” he said after the figures were
published.
Gasoline prices have moderated, as have natural gas prices, though a senior administration official
said this “relief” was not captured in the November report.
At risk for the White House is legislation to invest $1.75tn in the US’s social safety net, which Biden
is seeking to pass through Congress this month. Last month the president signed into law another
flagship $1.2tn bipartisan infrastructure bill.
Republicans and some moderate Democrats have argued that additional spending will add further
fuel to rising prices, contributing to even higher inflation, although academic economists consulted
in a recent poll for the Financial Times said the administration’s planned expenditures were not
expected to alter the inflation outlook substantially.
Following November’s inflation numbers, the Federal Reserve is likely to press ahead with plans to
more quickly scale back its asset purchase programme at its meeting next week.
Jay Powell, chair of the central bank, signalled his support for a quicker exit earlier this month,
acknowledging that the risks of inflation becoming entrenched had risen.
Economists now predict that pace will be doubled so that the stimulus programme ends in March,
which would give the Fed more flexibility to raise interest rates sooner next year. The first interest
rate increase is expected in June, with roughly two more planned for later in the year.

Michael Pond, head of global inflation-linked research at Barclays, said: “We are now seeing a
tightening of policy on the basis of risk management.”
Prices between October and November jumped 0.8 per cent, slightly down from the previous
month-on-month increase of 0.9 per cent.
“Broad increases in most component indices” fuelled the rise, the BLS said, with gasoline, shelter,
food, and used and new vehicles “among the larger contributors”.
Stripping out volatile items such as food and energy, core CPI climbed 0.5 per cent from October.
That is roughly in line with the previous period, and pushed up the annual pace to 4.9 per cent.
Last month, it registered 4.6 per cent.
“Inflation will be more persistent,” said Anna Stupnytska, global macro economist at Fidelity
International. “It is very likely to stay well above [the Federal Reserve’s 2 per cent] target through
2022.”

The energy index rose 3.5 per cent between October and November, while the gasoline index
jumped 6.1 per cent. On an annual basis they are 33 per cent and 58 per cent higher, respectively.
Shelter-related costs, which represent about a third of the CPI index, rose 0.5 per cent over the
month, with owners’ equivalent rent — which measures what homeowners believe their properties
would rent for — up 0.4 per cent, for an annual increase of 3.5 per cent. Hotel expenses climbed 3.2
per cent and are up 26 per cent on the year.
Prices for household furnishings increased 0.7 per cent in November, pushing up the annual pace
to 6 per cent. Apparel costs rose after a string of monthly declines, registering a 1.3 per cent
increase for the month. On an annual basis, prices are 5 per cent higher. Airline fares also bucked a
months-long decline, jumping 4.7 per cent.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US politics & policy
US inflation
US
Colby Smith

