FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Lex

Used cars: inflation bump prompts Americans to skimp their rides
US customers are wary of buying big-ticket items despite declining vehicle prices

In the second quarter, retail unit sales fell a steep 8.3% versus 2021 on a like-for-like basis at CarMax © Bloomberg

Published OCT 4 2022

There will be no soft impact for the US used auto market. Prices for new and used vehicles have
been a crucial driver of inflation. Demand has been heavy while supplies have been curbed by
pandemic shutdowns.
Used car prices are now falling. The closely watched Manheim Used Vehicle Value index, which
measures the wholesale market, slipped 2.3 per cent in September. The used car component of the
US consumer price index has also declined recently.

Sharper signals emerged last week. In the second quarter, retail unit sales fell a steep 8.3 per cent
versus 2021 on a like-for-like basis at CarMax. The big used car dealer blamed the shortfall on the
higher day-to-day expenses consumers are dealing with. They are wary of buying big-ticket items.
The company said sales results deteriorated markedly as the quarter progressed.
Within its wholesale segment, CarMax noted a depreciation per vehicle of $2,500. That drop was
so fast it resembled falls in 2008-09. The results were shocking enough that the company’s shares
crashed by nearly one-quarter, a loss of $3bn in market capitalisation.
The trends that benefited CarMax and its sector for two and half years are not just unwinding —
they are doing so at alarming speed.
Still, used vehicles are hardly cheap. The Manheim index is nearly 50 per cent above its level three
years ago. CarMax noted that even if whole depreciation per vehicle hit $2,500, appreciation in
2021 was $7,500.
The company is exposed to losses from buying cars in the market sold later at a markdown.
Car dealers play the role of banks via consumer finance arms that lend to buyers. CarMax said its
average loan bore an interest rate above 9 per cent. Borrower delinquencies hit record lows in
2021. They have now started to return to historical levels.
There is a real chance Fed tightening will push the economy into recession. This would put a big
strain on the affordability of cars and the creditworthiness of customers, even after sticker prices
fall. Lower inflation has become a global imperative. Anyone seeking to sell a used car — dealers
included — are feeling the consequences.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Lex

Retail & Consumer industry
Automobiles
CarMax Inc
US

