FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion The FT View

For markets, inflation fears are joined by recession risks
Sell-off that began with speculative tech stocks has become broader-based

THE EDITORIAL BOARD

Traders work on the trading floor at the New York Stock last week © Andrew Kelly/Reuters

The editorial board
Published MAY 22 2022

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel

“Sell in May and go away,” runs the old market adage, referring to stocks’ tendency to
underperform from May to October. The third week of May 2022 may come to be seen as a bigger
tipping point. Sharp falls in US and other markets last week were the moment when a sell-off that
had started in the most speculative assets and technology stocks and spread to more profitable and
established tech names became much more broad-based. That reflected a shift in investor
sentiment. Worries about inflation have been joined by worries about recession — one that central
banks may cause or worsen in their efforts to cool economies.
The catalyst, surprisingly, was earnings from two of the biggest big-box retailers, Walmart and
Target. Both said sales were up but profits fell because of increasing costs and tightening margins.
Both experienced double-digit share price falls more akin to moves seen in profitless growth stocks
than dependable sellers of consumer goods. The market sell-off spread to other consumer staple
stocks.
Apparent signs that even these powerful retailers were struggling to pass on cost pressures made
investors fret that the record-high corporate profit margins and buoyant US consumer spending
that have underpinned market returns in recent years were coming to an abrupt end. That took
concerns into new territory. Previously, the withdrawal of liquidity after years of cheap money had
mostly blown the froth off the most speculative assets, notably cryptocurrencies. The prospect of
higher interest rates had chiefly hit tech and growth stocks whose valuations rely on bigger profits
in the distant future.
Growing anxiety about the impact of the Federal Reserve’s response to inflation is coinciding with
problems elsewhere. Lockdowns prompted by China’s zero-Covid policy are both crimping
domestic growth and gumming up international supply chains. European consumers are being
squeezed by soaring energy costs thanks to Russia’s war in Ukraine.

This leaves markets at a delicate point, and some money managers fear that if they go into a
steeper slide, structural issues could magnify price falls. A new generation of portfolio managers
has limited experience of managing bear markets. Trading conditions are clunkier, in part because
banks have been constrained by capital adequacy rules from warehousing securities intraday and
smoothing big movements as they used to before the 2008 financial crisis. Funds that have made
bad speculative investments may be forced into firesales of higher-quality assets.
Such doomsday scenarios may not come to pass. Closer examination of Walmart and Target’s
earnings reveals they ran up unusually large inventories — in Target’s case of big-ticket items such
as furniture and TVs that consumers were buying in the pandemic but less so now — and had to cut
prices to clear them. If what we are seeing is a sign that a late pandemic shift — the skewing of US
demand towards goods and away from services — is unwinding, that could help to curb inflation by
removing a force that had turbocharged goods prices. Falls in asset prices to date will also have
wealth effects that might yet make it easier for the Fed to achieve its objectives without raising
rates as far as it might otherwise have expected.
With US inflation above 8 per cent and Treasuries — unusually — also selling off in recent weeks,
there are few safe places for investors. Commodities and energy stocks may be safer than some,
though investors may have to hold their noses over ESG concerns. But amid such uncertainties,
another market adage that proved a successful strategy in recent corrections — “buy the dip” —
does not seem a safe bet.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
The editorial board
The FT View
Global inflation
Equity valuation

