FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion US inflation

Fed policy must adjust for inflation
Even if the price rises we are seeing could be transitory, they risk becoming
permanent

MARTIN WOLF

© James Ferguson

Martin Wolf
Published NOV 16 2021

It starts with the occasional rock as the policymakers row over the sea of denial. Then many more
rocks appear. Finally, they see that they are sailing towards an inflationary cliff. Only with great
effort do they turn the ship around and row to safety.

This is how the world is beginning to feel to someone whose life as an economist began in the
1970s. Few wanted to believe Milton Friedman’s warnings. But he was right. The process began to
be visible with jumps in prices in what the late John Hicks called “flexprice” markets, such as those
for food. Some jumps in prices could be explained away by supply restrictions, such as the oil
embargo of 1973-74. In what Hicks called “fixprice” markets we saw excess demand and shortages.
But, as price rises became more general and real wages were being eroded, workers became
increasingly militant. Finally, a general wage-price spiral became all too visible.

Headline and core prices are rising, especially in the US
Consumer price indices (Jan 2020 = 100)
US headline

Eurozone headline

UK headline

US core

Eurozone core

UK core

Oct 2020

Jan 2021

Apr 2021

Jul 2021

107
106
105
104
103
102
101
100
99
Jan 2020

Apr 2020

Jul 2020

Oct 202

Source: Refinitiv • 'Core' = excluding food and energ

What lay behind all this? The answer is: over-optimism on potential supply, until it was too late.
Are we making the same errors now? In my view, yes. Even if the price rises we are seeing could be
transitory, they risk becoming permanent. Moreover, even if one is more optimistic than this, it
seems impossible to justify present monetary policy settings, especially in the US. Current policy
would make sense in a depression. But we no longer risk a depression.
In May 2020, I noted warnings from the monetarist, Tim Congdon, about the inflation to come. In
early 2021, well-known Keynesians, notably Lawrence Summers and Olivier Blanchard, joined in,
largely in response to the huge fiscal stimulus proposed by Joe Biden. I repeated my concerns
about inflation in March and May and on other occasions.

Now, worriers feel vindicated. In a recent column, Summers lays out a detailed response to the
“team transitory” view put forward by Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell at Jackson Hole in August.
This is not surprising. In the US, headline inflation reached 6.2 per cent in the year to October
2021. Worse, core inflation (without food and energy prices) reached 4.6 per cent. Fortunately, the
position looks better in the eurozone and the UK, with core inflation rates of 1.9 and 2.9 per cent,
respectively. The European Central Bank’s view that the inflation threat is far smaller in the
eurozone than the US looks correct.

US labour market has substantially but not entirely normalised
Employment rate (% of people aged 15-64) Right scale

Unemployment rate (% of labour force) Left scale

14

7

13

7

12

7

11

7

10

7

9

7

8
6
7
6
6
6

5

6

4

6

3
2

6

1

6

0
Q1 2000 Q2 2002 Q3 2004 Q4 2006 Q1 2009Q1 2011 Q1 2013 Q1 2015 Q1 2017 Q1 2019 Q1 2021

6

Source: Refinit

Today, as Summers notes, prices are rising in many sectors of the US economy, including housing.
Moreover, inflation expectations derived from the gap between conventional and index-linked
Treasuries have risen by around a percentage point over the past year. As Harvard’s Jason Furman
stresses, signs of pressure are emerging in labour markets. Certainly, the latter have largely
recovered. (See charts.)
Nevertheless, one can still note special factors. Among them are surging prices of gas. A detailed
analysis by the International Energy Agency describes a number of factors on the demand and
supply side — among them that “European underground gas storage levels at the end of September
were 15 per cent below their five-year average levels”. So while the strength of demand played a
role, it was not the sole factor.

A similar point is the nature of the post-crisis surge in demand, especially the rush to buy
consumer durables. This is presumably because many people are nervous about going out to enjoy
a meal or some other service. The surge in demand for durables shows up in demand for industrial
inputs and so also transport across the world’s extended supply chains. Indeed, Neil Shearing, chief
economist at Capital Economics, asserts that the real story “is how well the supply chain has held
up given the huge shift in demand towards goods”.
Yet, as time passes, special factors become less credible and worries that inflation will become
ingrained more so. With fiscal policy now tightening, even in the US, the burden for
macroeconomic stabilisation falls on central banks and especially the Fed. There is no
macroeconomic case, however, not to carry through with Biden’s “Build Back Better” programme.
This, argues Furman, “would have a minuscule impact on inflation over the medium and long
term” and also do much good.

All the big central banks are still largely locked into policy settings introduced in March 2020, at
the peak of the Covid-induced panic. In the US, this seems wildly inappropriate. After all, with
inflation rising so fast, real short-term interest rates are close to minus 5 per cent, even on the core
inflation rate. It is hard to see why this should be the case now. Today’s problems are with supply,
not demand. The Fed can do nothing about these.
It may be that the Fed is holding off from the obvious moves towards normalisation because of its
shift towards targeting average inflation. Yet it has never made sense to me that the world’s leading
central bank should respond to its past failures by deliberately making opposite mistakes in future,
a point also made in detail by Willem Buiter. This just adds fresh elements of uncertainty.

Another reason for holding off may be the belief that running the economy “hot” will bring large
social benefits and limited costs. That is a good argument for sustaining demand. But it is a risky
argument for not responding to rapid rises in inflation. The danger is that outcomes may continue
to prove far worse than expected. Then the Fed would be compelled to play catch-up. The costs of
that would vastly exceed those of adjusting its ultra-loose policy now.

I very much hope that this inflation will vanish. But hope is not enough. Present policy settings
look inappropriate. The Fed needs a new senior management prepared to stand back and think
through where the US and world economies actually are. A faster shift towards monetary sobriety
now could prevent having to go cold turkey later on.

martin.wolf@ft.com
Follow Martin Wolf with myFT and on Twitter

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Martin Wolf
US economy
US inflation
Federal Reserve

