FT PROFESSIONAL

US inflation

Federal Reserve’s preferred inflation measure held steady at 2.5% in July
Data comes after chair Jay Powell said the ‘time has come’ to begin cutting rates

As prices ease, much of the debate among Fed watchers has shifted to whether the central bank will cut by 0.25 percentage points or
0.5 percentage points in September © Scott Olson/Getty Images

James Politi in Washington and Nicholas Megaw in New York
Published AUG 30 2024 | Updated AUG 30 2024, 16:28

The Federal Reserve’s preferred measure of inflation held steady at 2.5 per cent in the year to July,
according to data released on Friday that paves the way for the US central bank to start cutting
interest rates next month.
The personal consumption expenditures price index compared with economists’ expectations of a
2.6 per cent rise and June’s figure of 2.5 per cent. The Fed’s target for the headline PCE index is 2
per cent a year.
“Core” PCE — which strips out volatile food and energy costs — remained at 2.6 per cent, below the
forecast 2.7 per cent.

The figures from the commerce department come after Fed chair Jay Powell said last week that the
“time has come” to begin cutting rates as inflation eases and the labour market slows.
Powell’s comments at the annual Jackson Hole conference made it all but certain that the central
bank will lower its main rate from its current range of between 5.25 and 5.5 per cent at its next
meeting in September.
Much of the debate among Fed watchers has now shifted to whether the central bank will cut by
0.25 or 0.5 percentage points, and how steep the reductions will be for the rest of the year.
The S&P 500 gained 1 per cent on Friday. US government bond prices eased slightly following the
publication of the data. The yield on the two-year Treasury note, which rises when prices fall, was
up 0.03 percentage points on the day, at 3.92 per cent.
Gregory Daco, chief economist at EY, said that the report “does not indicate that inflation is
moving up in any way”, adding that it “highlights as expected that the Fed has the option” to begin
lowering rates.

The data will come as a boost to the Biden administration and vice-president Kamala Harris’s
presidential campaign, since it provides further evidence that inflation is easing.
It will also help to blunt attacks by Republican rival Donald Trump on Harris over the cost of
living, which remains a key concern for voters.
On Thursday, during her first big interview since she entered the race, Harris told CNN she was
“very proud of the work that we have done that has brought inflation down to less than 3 per cent”.
But she added that there was “more to do” to bring down expenses for middle- and working-class
households.
The bigger economic concern for Harris is now the slowing labour market, and whether it will
affect voter sentiment heading into November’s election.
Next week’s release of jobs and unemployment figures for August could be pivotal, after the July
data showed an unexpected slump.
“Payrolls takes on even more importance because what [the Fed] really needs to look at is the
speed of the deterioration and whether they can arrest that,” MetLife Investment Management
chief market strategist Drew Matus said. “The soft landing is a lot harder to achieve than people
think, in part because it really requires a lot of foresight and willingness to act far in advance of
evidence, and that’s not something this Fed has been willing to do in the past.”
However, the commerce department data on Friday showed no signs of a downward shift in
consumer spending. Personal consumption expenditures rose by 0.5 per cent in July compared
with a 0.3 per cent increase in June.
Personal income rose 0.3 per cent compared with 0.2 per cent the previous month.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US economy
US inflation
US interest rates
Central banks
Federal Reserve

