FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Unhedged

Is the market too rich and too thin?
And the return of hyperinflation in lumber

ETHAN WU ROBERT ARMSTRONG

Robert Armstrong and Ethan Wu
Published DEC 15 2021

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
This article is an on-site version of our Unhedged newsletter. Sign up here to get the newsletter
sent straight to your inbox every weekday

Good morning. Fed day! Good luck everyone! Email us with predictions before the release lands
this afternoon! robert.armstrong@ft.com and ethan.wu@ft.com.

Into the narrows
Like a concerned parent clucking over a wan teenager, investors are worried that the market looks
thin. Breadth — an umbrella term for various measures of the proportion of stocks in an index that
are performing well — has collapsed. Does this mean those few stocks still hitting highs are on
borrowed time?
Here’s Jared Dillian at Mauldin Economics writing in Bloomberg:

There have been episodes of declining breadth in the past, and those usually
presage large corrections or bear markets. The Nifty 50 episode in the 1960s
is one example. But even in the dotcom bubble, breadth declined steadily
until March of 2000, at which point there was only one stock standing: Cisco
Systems. When Cisco broke on an earnings report, that was it for the dotcom
bubble.
Does a narrowing market really presage a downturn? As Dillian notes, it sometimes has, but there
have been false dusks, too. The chart below shows the past two decades of monthly S&P 500
downturns against market breadth:

Other than the fact recessions are bad for stocks, we don’t see an obvious relationship in this chart.
In June 2010, bad breadth accompanied a market thrashing, but even worse breadth sounded a
false alarm in September 2014. A period of persistent market thinness around 2015 coincided with
stocks trading sideways. A simple regression analysis finds that weaker breadth didn’t correspond
with future market slides.
Even seemingly straightforward examples such as the dotcom bubble contain subtleties, as Capital
Economics’ John Higgins pointed out in a recent note:

[T]he S&P 500 has sometimes narrowed for a long period without falling
sharply. It did so during most of the second half of the 1990s, as the dotcom
bubble inflated. That bubble only burst around the turn of the century. And
it did so for most of the second half of the last decade — when the index
generally soared — before the onset of the pandemic.

We sympathise with the jitters, though. Valuations are stretched, the S&P 500’s real earnings yield
is at a record low, and macro conditions look increasingly inhospitable. The top-heaviness of US
equities’ performance inspires fear that investor sentiment is turning sour. This amusing pie chart
from Bank of America’s strategy team drives the point home:

Can a rich, thin market be sustained by a handful of super-stocks? Perhaps. We do seem to live in
an increasingly tech-driven economy, where network effects and increasing returns to scale mean a
few companies make most of the profits, and everyone else fights for scraps. In such a world, one
would own a stock index not to capture broad returns, but instead knowing that returns would be
very unevenly distributed, in ways impossible to predict in advance.

Crazy lumber inflation is back
Someone pointed out to me this summer that inflation is always idiosyncratic. For every item or
commodity or service that is rising in price, there is a particular and usually surprising story about
why people want more of it than usual or the supply is abnormally constrained, or both. It is
therefore tempting to explain away every particular instance of inflation, and so deny, a little bit at
a time, the general economy-wide inflationary trend. This would be a mistake.
Such was the case with wild timber prices in the spring of this year. Yes, they were historically
unprecedented, but look closely at the market and you find a one-off burst in DIY project spending
by cooped-up homeowners meeting very cold weather in the lumber-producing areas of the US
south-east, which shut sawmills. Things duly got back to nearly normal by summer. Sometimes
inflation just goes away, and that is very reassuring.
Sometimes, however, inflation goes away and then comes back. That is not reassuring. And all of a
sudden, lumber is back at $1,000 per thousand board feet (data from Refinitiv):

Paul Jannke, lumber principal at the consultancy Forest Economic Advisors and our go-to lumber
guy, said demand has been strong since Covid hit, but the real swing factor has been supply. In
sum:

There is always a seasonal slowdown in buying by lumber wholesalers in
October and November. Delivery from mills, and then delivery to retailers,
takes about three months, and retail lumber demand is weak in the dead of
winter. It is normal for buying to pick up in December, but
The import duty on Canadian is very likely doubling soon, to 18 per cent,
and
Many wholesalers held off buying until recently in anticipation of a large
amount of sawmill capacity that was set to come on in the south, but labour
shortages at these mills have limited production, and
Very wet weather has made it hard to pull trees out of southern forests
(heavy equipment tears up the moist forest floor). Finally,
In British Columbia, the highest-producing region in Canada, rain was so
heavy this year that much of the harvest (already much reduced by the
mountain pine beetle) was prevented from reaching the market.
“Typically lumber prices are $350 to $400. The move to $600 is lack of supply coming from the
south — about $100 of that is labour shortage and $100 is weather. The jump past $700 is down to
the lack of supply from British Columbia — which dragged the whole market higher,” Jannke says.
For those worried that inflation is going to persist, the point that sticks out there is the one about
mill labour. Jannke says that mill jobs tend to be in rural locations and not very well paid — and yet
in modern mills the jobs require tech savviness, too. So potential workers can often find better paid
work that is less remote, a long-term problem for the industry.
Are lumber prices one of those idiosyncratic stories that, all the same, reflects wider inflationary
pressures? Right now, labour issues have pushed prices up by something like 25 per cent, on
Jannke’s account. That’s significant, even if the other, larger contributors to the supply shortages
subside soon.

One good read
Over at Alphaville, Jamie Powell sees an early indication that companies that “won” Covid might
have pulled demand forward from the future — and could see sales fall sharply post-pandemic. We
will keep a close eye on revenue estimates and guidance in the months to come.

Recommended newsletters for you
FT Asset Management — The inside story on the movers and shakers behind a multitrilliondollar industry. Sign up here
Free Lunch — Your guide to the global economic policy debate. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Ethan Wu
Robert Armstrong
Unhedged
US equities
Markets

