FT PROFESSIONAL

Markets Briefing Equities

US stocks fall as investors assess rate rise outlook
Traders’ concern increases over effect on company profits of Fed’s aggressive monetary tightening

Lael Brainard, vice-chair of the US Federal Reserve: ‘We are determined to stay the course’ © Bloomberg

Harriet Clarfelt in New York and George Steer in London
Published JAN 19 2023 | Updated JAN 19 2023, 16:39

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
Wall Street stocks fell on Thursday after central bankers vowed to “stay the course” on fighting
inflation, and as investors analysed a new batch of data for clues about the health of the US
economy.
The benchmark S&P 500 index closed 0.8 per cent lower, while the technology-heavy Nasdaq
Composite lost 1 per cent.

Thursday’s equity market moves came as Lael Brainard, vice-chair of the Federal Reserve, said “it
will take time and resolve” to get “high” inflation back down to the US central bank’s target of 2 per
cent.
“We are determined to stay the course,” Brainard said at an event hosted by the University of
Chicago’s Booth School of Business.
Earlier in the day, European Central Bank president Christine Lagarde said in a panel discussion at
the World Economic Forum: “We shall stay the course until . . . we can return inflation to 2 per cent
in a timely manner.”
European shares closed lower, with the regional Stoxx 600 sliding 1.6 per cent.
The stock index declines on Thursday followed data releases giving the latest signals about the
state of the world’s largest economy.
Initial claims for US unemployment benefits fell to 190,000 in the week ending January 14 from
205,000 in the previous week, a report showed, indicating labour market resilience despite the
Fed’s efforts to tighten monetary policy. Economists polled by Reuters had expected 214,000
claims.
But a separate release on Thursday showed that the rate of US new home construction fell to a fivemonth low in December as higher mortgage rates weighed on demand.
A day earlier, weak US retail sales figures and signs of a steep decline in industrial production had
pushed the S&P 500 down 1.6 per cent.
Amid rising confidence that inflation has peaked, concerns have intensified about the possible
depth of an expected recession and the effects of the Fed’s interest rate rises on company profits.
Microsoft’s announcement on Wednesday of plans to cut 10,000 workers only added to the gloom,
while consumer goods conglomerate Procter & Gamble’s shares slid after reporting on Thursday
that net sales slipped in its latest quarter from a year earlier.

“Bad news is bad news” again, said Charlie McElligott, a strategist at Nomura. Noting US equities’
relatively strong start to 2023 against an uncertain macroeconomic backdrop, Premier Miton’s
chief investment officer Neil Birrell joked he was “worried we’ve had the entire year’s returns in the
first two weeks”.
US Treasuries, which had rallied across the board in the previous session, came under some
pressure on Thursday. The yield on the benchmark 10-year note rose 0.02 percentage points to 3.4
per cent.
German and Italian government bond yields also moved higher following Lagarde’s hawkish
comments. Bond yields rise as their prices fall.

Elsewhere in equity markets, Hong Kong’s Hang Seng index fell 0.1 per cent and China’s CSI 300
added 0.6 per cent, with both indices up sharply in recent months thanks to Beijing’s reversal of
strict zero-Covid policies in December.

Prices for Brent crude, the international oil benchmark, rose 1.5 per cent, erasing earlier losses, to
trade at just over $86 a barrel.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Currencies
Bonds
Commodities
European equities
Equities

