FT PROFESSIONAL

FirstFT World

FirstFT: Fed to leave rates higher for even longer
Also in today’s newsletter, latest on campus demonstrations and cruise operator Viking’s market debut

Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell: ‘I think it’s unlikely that the next policy rate move will be a hike’ © Susan Walsh/AP

Gordon Smith
Published MAY 1 2024 | Updated MAY 2 2024, 06:37

Good morning. First, we return to the Federal Reserve’s battle against inflation after US central
bank chair Jay Powell said yesterday that there had been “a lack of further progress” towards its
target.
“It is likely to take longer for us to gain confidence that we are on a sustainable path down to 2 per
cent inflation,” Jay Powell said after the Fed left its main lending rate at a 23-year high of 5.25 per
cent to 5.5 per cent. “I don’t know how long it will take.”

But Powell also indicated that the central bank was not yet considering increasing interest rates
despite a recent uptick in the consumer price index, driven by fuel price rises.
“I think it’s unlikely that the next policy rate move will be a hike,” Powell said.
Powell also pushed back on suggestions that growth could slow while inflation remains above the
target — a phenomenon known as stagflation.
“I don’t see the ‘stag’, I don’t see the ‘flation’,” he said. Read more of his comments and the market
reaction.

More on US interest rates: Persistent inflation presents a problem for
Powell and Joe Biden.
Opinion: The Fed is utterly frozen between two poles, unable to even
gesture in either direction, writes Robert Armstrong in today’s edition of
the Unhedged newsletter.
Want more insight into how rate-setters are fighting inflation? Sign up for our Central Banks
newsletter by Chris Giles if you’re a premium subscriber, or upgrade your subscription here.
Here’s what else I’m keeping tabs on today:

Results: Competition in China will be a major focus for shareholders when
Apple releases results. Regeneron, ConocoPhillips, Moderna, New York
Stock Exchange-owner Intercontinental Exchange, Amgen, Booking
Holdings, Block, Illumina, and Coinbase also report results.
Economic data: US trade deficit for March is published as well as weekly
jobless claims and factory orders.

Bank of Canada: Governor Tiff Macklem will testify to the House of
Commons Standing Committee on Finance about the bank’s latest
economic forecasts.
Uber: A multimillion-pound lawsuit will be filed in London’s High Court
today by London’s black-cab drivers against the US ride-hailing app.

Five more top stories
1. University campuses from New York to Los Angeles simmered with rage and
recriminations yesterday as they dealt with the fallout from police operations to quash protests
over the war in Gaza. UCLA told students to avoid the campus today and tomorrow, with classes
scheduled to be held remotely, while New York mayor Eric Adams blamed “outside agitators” for
escalating anti-Israel demonstrations at Columbia University. Here’s the latest on the biggest US
campus protests since 1968.

More on the protests: The demonstrations are overshadowing Donald
Trump’s trial in New York and amplifying tensions in the Democratic party
over the Gaza war. James Politi reports on how Republicans have seized on
the campus protests to attack Biden.
Greene threatens to oust Johnson: Rightwing congresswoman
Marjorie Taylor Greene has said she will seek the removal of House Speaker
Mike Johnson next week as a civil war within the Republican party
escalates.
2. Shares in cruise operator Viking Holdings, which caters to English speakers over
55 and bans passengers younger than 18, rose 9 per cent on their market debut.
Strong demand from investors led Viking to increase the size of the deal twice before pricing for the
second-largest IPO in the US this year. The upsized deal is likely to give hope to private equity
groups, which are estimated to be sitting on 28,000 unsold companies, that are seeking to offload
long-held investments. Here’s who made the money on this IPO.

3. Embraer is exploring options for a new passenger aircraft to rival Airbus and
Boeing, people familiar with the situation said. The Brazilian aerospace and defence group is
studying plans for a narrow-body aircraft or a long-range business jet, with a proposal ready for the
company’s board by the end of next year. Here’s more on the project, which is still in its early
stages.
4. US regulators are poised to approve ExxonMobil’s $60bn acquisition of Pioneer
Natural Resources on the condition that the smaller oil company’s former chief
executive does not join the supermajor’s board. The Federal Trade Commission had raised
concerns about potential anti-competitive behaviour if Scott Sheffield joined Exxon’s board,
according to a person with knowledge of an agreement struck between regulators and the
companies to approve the acquisition. Here’s more on the FTC allegations against Sheffield.

More energy business news: Big shareholders in Shell have urged other
investors to back their resolution at the upcoming annual meeting calling
on the oil major to take more action to fight climate change.
5. US law firm Mayer Brown is to split its China operations from its global network,
becoming the latest law company to rethink its business there as market conditions remain weak
and tensions fray with the US. Mayer Brown, one of the world’s top-grossing law firms, is working
on a plan to hive off its Hong Kong, Shanghai and Beijing offices, according to two people close to
the firm. Here’s more on the proposed split.

Visual story

Stalled western aid and Russia’s success in a primarily land-based war have made for a tough start
to the year for Ukraine. But in the Black Sea, Kyiv continues to make progress. Despite having no
real navy, Ukraine has disabled or destroyed a third of Russia’s Black Sea fleet over the past two
years. Our latest visual story explores Ukraine’s striking naval success and its strategic and
economic importance for a country dependent on seaborne trade.

We’re also reading . . .
Berkshire after Buffett: The second part of our series on the company’s
future looks at Ajit Jain, the risk “genius” running Berkshire Hathaway’s
insurance operations.
Goldman Sachs: The head of JPMorgan’s rapidly growing exchange
traded funds business, Bryon Lake, is to leave the bank and join Goldman
Sachs Asset Management.

Italian politics: Deputy premier Matteo Salvini is facing a revolt within
his far-right League party after he picked a homophobic, pro-Russia
candidate for EU elections.

Chart of the day

High flows of immigration into rich countries are helping to strengthen jobs markets and bolster
growth, the OECD said today, as it lifted its outlook for the global economy. Global growth is
estimated to be 3.1 per cent this year, the OECD said, up from a previous estimate of 2.9 per cent.
However, there is a clear transatlantic divergence in fortunes. The OECD upgraded its US growth
forecast while keeping its eurozone predictions unchanged.

Take a break from the news
The Messi Experience is a nine-room, walk-through extravaganza of AI, 3D and CGI dedicated to
arguably the greatest footballer of all time. Ruaridh Nicoll visits the new “immersive” experience in
Miami.

A pep talk from an AI Lionel Messi in a recreation of a stadium dressing room © Bruno Aïello-Destombes

Additional contributions by Tee Zhuo and Benjamin Wilhelm

Recommended newsletters for you
Working It — Everything you need to get ahead at work, in your inbox every Wednesday. Sign
up here
One Must-Read — The one piece of journalism you should read today. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy

World
Companies
FirstFT
Gordon Smith

