FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Global Insight

While the world fights inflation, China’s problem is deflation
Zero-Covid policy has left the world’s second-largest economy out of sync with its
peers

THOMAS HALE

Residential buildings under construction in Shanghai. The property market has seen waves of defaults among developers and a fall
in transactions © Aly Song/Reuters

Thomas Hale
Published NOV 14 2022

From a property crisis to strict Covid controls to its lowest growth target in three decades, the
Chinese economy is facing many problems. But inflation is not among them.

Data released last week showed that consumer prices added 2.1 per cent year on year in October —
the kind of moderated gain that western policymakers can only dream of. Producer prices, a
measure of prices for goods as they leave factory gates, entered negative territory for the first time
since 2020.
There are caveats. Producer prices fell against a high base last year, China’s National Bureau of
Statistics noted, with prices in the metals and coal mining industry falling significantly. But
without food and energy, core inflation was 0.6 per cent: consumer prices heavily rely on pork,
which makes up a tenth of the basket and whose price rose 52 per cent in October after swine feverrelated decimations of herds.
While other big economies have been struggling to tame inflation during the pandemic, China,
where Covid-19 still dominates a languid economy and authorities continue to enforce lockdowns
and mass testing, is grappling with the threat of deflation. As well as encouraging consumers to
delay purchases in the hope of prices falling further, deflation is a problem for borrowers because it
increases the real value of their debts, making them harder to repay compared with present-day
incomes.
“Deflation is worse than inflation in China for sure because it drives up the cost of borrowing for
both consumers and corporates,” said Dan Wang, chief China economist at Hang Seng Bank China.
Debts for corporates and local governments were still the country’s “highest financial risks”, she
added.
The risk of high debt in China is encapsulated in its property crisis, which has in the past year seen
waves of defaults across highly leveraged real estate developers and a fall in transactions. Deflation
stood to increase pressure on households’ mortgage payments, Wang added, and a slower property
market was indirectly putting “downward pressure” on consumption.
“If people don’t buy an apartment, there will be pretty much no durable goods consumption.”

The future of inflation in China is bound up with its zero-Covid policies. Although cases this week
reached a six-month high, the government’s approach has for now meant that only a tiny fraction
of the population has been infected almost three years after it emerged. The government slightly
eased rules for inbound quarantine and contact tracing last week, but the timeline for any
reopening remains uncertain.
Erin Xin, an economist for greater China at HSBC, notes that the government has been “fine
tuning” its Covid policies and that a potential “gradual consumption recovery” could help with the
demand side of inflation.
One of the few signs of inflation in China is food prices in big cities, which Wang suggests may be a
result of the higher cost of transporting food between provinces, given strict travel restrictions
under zero-Covid.
Otherwise, she notes household savings have been rising rapidly this year. This has a faint echo of
what happened in western economies, which in 2020 also grappled with the threat of deflation and
saw higher savings, before prices began to rise sharply in 2021.
In China, the government has over the past year sought to gently ease monetary policy rather than
unleashing vast stimulus of the kind seen in the US and Europe. But Beijing may be forced to
provide such stimulus to its local governments, which shoulder many of the costs for zero-Covid
and can no longer rely on land sales to developers.
A rapid reopening in China combined with a shift in the government’s approach to stimulus could
swing the pendulum on inflation, with profound implications for the world given the country’s
demand for energy and its production of goods.
But for now, this is not a central scenario. China, under its Covid policy framework, is edging closer
to deflation. For the rest of the world, this might provide an unexpected source of relief.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Thomas Hale
Global Insight
Global Economy
Global inflation
Covid-19

