FT PROFESSIONAL

US quantitative easing

Fed official signals economy is strong enough for taper to begin
John Williams urges ‘patient’ approach to tightening policy further by raising rates

John Williams, president of the New York Fed, said the US recovery was showing ‘solid momentum’ © Bloomberg

Colby Smith in Washington
Published SEP 27 2021

A senior official at the Federal Reserve signalled the US economy is strong enough for the central
bank to begin reducing its massive bond-buying programme, but urged a “patient” approach to
raising interest rates.
John Williams, president of the New York Fed, acknowledged the improving economic outlook and
set the stage for the Fed to scale back its $120bn-a-month asset purchase programme this year.
But he stressed that the conditions necessary for the Fed to eventually adjust its main policy rate
were a long way off from being met.

“The headline of our economic story is good news: the recovery continues to show solid
momentum. But the subheading is that we’ll need to be patient,” he said at an event hosted by the
Economic Club of New York on Monday. “Even with the strong pace of growth we experienced
much of this year, a full recovery from the pandemic will take time to complete.”
Williams, who sees the economy expanding between 5.5 to 6 per cent this year, said a move to
reduce the central bank’s asset purchase programme may “soon be warranted”, echoing the
message sent by Fed chair Jay Powell last week.
Powell last week teed up an announcement on the tapering process at the next policy meeting in
November and signalled widespread support among central bank officials for the stimulus
programme to be wound down entirely by mid-2022.
The Fed had said it would continue buying Treasuries and agency mortgage-backed securities at
the monthly pace until it saw “substantial further progress” towards inflation that averages 2 per
cent and maximum employment.
Fed board governor Lael Brainard on Monday said she wanted to see more employment progress
before but acknowledged that if the labour market recovery continues as hoped, “it may soon meet
the mark”.
Further guidance about the taper timeline followed revised individual projections about interest
rates last week, which showed an increasing number of Fed officials now pencilling in a rate rise in
2022. That left the 18-person Federal Open Market Committee evenly divided on a move next year,
with at least three increases expected by the end of 2023.
Chicago Fed president Charles Evans said on Monday that he supports lift-off in 2023 and a
“gentle incline” in interest rates from there.
Powell reiterated last week that the thresholds for the Fed to lift interest rates from current nearzero levels are much more stringent than those for dialling down the asset purchase programme, a
point Brainard echoed on Monday during her speech at a National Association for Business
Economics event.

Williams on Monday said the labour market still has a “long way to go” before fulfilling the Fed’s
maximum employment goal. While the unemployment rate has dropped to 5.2 per cent, there are
still more than 5.3m fewer jobs than there were before the pandemic.
Brainard added that she expects employment to reach levels “as strong or stronger” than before the
pandemic, especially when Covid-related constraints fade, including fears of catching the virus at
work and childcare responsibilities.
“While these constraints have been prolonged by the Delta variant, they are not permanent or
structural,” she said.
On inflation, Williams said the burst of price pressures, which have pushed US consumer price
growth to a 13-year high, are likely to fade over time as supply chain bottlenecks ease.
He said he expects inflation to retrace to around 2 per cent next year. Core personal consumption
expenditure index, the Fed’s preferred gauge, sits at 3.6 per cent.
“It is important to remember that even after the asset purchases end, the stance of monetary policy
will continue to support a strong and full economic recovery and sustained attainment of 2 per cent
average inflation,” Williams added.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US economy
US inflation
Covid-19
US quantitative easing
US interest rates

