FT PROFESSIONAL

Markets Briefing Equities

US stocks slip as investors weigh earnings and jobless data
Difference between two- and 10-year Treasury yields at widest margin in decades

Investors analysed the latest data and company results for clues on the health of the US economy © Getty Images

Harriet Clarfelt in New York and Martha Muir in London
Published FEB 9 2023 | Updated FEB 9 2023, 16:42

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
Wall Street stocks fell on Thursday as investors assessed the latest batch of corporate updates and
fresh labour market data for clues about the outlook for the world’s biggest economy.
The benchmark S&P 500 index closed 0.9 per cent lower, while the Nasdaq Composite lost 1 per
cent. The latter gauge had climbed as much as 1.3 per cent earlier in the session.

Those declines came as tech giant Alphabet extended its losses into a second day, with its shares
sliding more than 4 per cent after closing almost 8 per cent lower on Wednesday. The declines
followed a glitch in a Google artificial intelligence demonstration this week and reflected broader
concerns over competition in the AI arena from Microsoft.
Walt Disney shares finished the day 1.3 per cent lower, but had been higher earlier in the day after
activist investor Nelson Peltz called time on his proxy fight against the company. Peltz’s decision
came after Disney reported late on Wednesday that it had stemmed losses in its streaming business
and posted better than expected quarterly earnings, helping push its shares higher in after-hours
trading.
Offering a brighter spot amid the downbeat moves, PepsiCo ticked higher — gaining almost 1 per
cent after the snacks and drinks group gave a relatively positive picture of consumer demand and
said it wasn’t planning price increases in the second half if inflation slows.
Traders were also analysing data on Thursday that showed higher than expected US jobless claims
in the first week of February.
New applications for state unemployment aid, which is a proxy for dismissals, rose to 196,000 for
the week to February 4 — higher than the figure of 190,000 forecast by economists polled by
Reuters, and above the previous week’s 183,000 applications.
That report came hot on the heels of data last week showing the US economy had added a much
higher than anticipated half a million new jobs in December.
Consumer price index data will be scrutinised next week for evidence of a further easing in the rate
of inflation. Market participants have been searching for signs about how far and fast the Federal
Reserve will continue to raise borrowing costs, after chair Jay Powell warned this week of even
higher rates if jobs data stays strong.
In government debt markets, the two-year Treasury yield — which moves in line with interest rate
expectations — added 0.03 percentage points to 4.48 per cent, reflecting a drop in price, while the
10-year yield rose by the same magnitude to 3.67 per cent. Earlier in Thursday’s session, the
inversion between the two yields hit its deepest level since 1981.

The dip below zero has historically been perceived as a harbinger of recession.
In Europe, the regional Stoxx 600 share gauge hit its highest level in nearly a year as the slowing
pace of price growth in Germany reassured investors that the European Central Bank would not
have to raise rates by more than expected.
German inflation slowed to 9.2 per cent in January from a year earlier, below economists’
expectations, a report on Thursday showed. The Stoxx closed 0.6 per cent higher.
Economists said the number eased the need for the ECB to raise rates quickly to combat rising
inflation.
“Some of the fear that they’ll have to push rates up a long way has come out of the market,” said
Neil Shearing, group chief economist at Capital Economics.
“However, the path towards substantially lower inflation rates won’t be easy,” warned Carsten
Brzeski, global head of macroeconomics at ING. “For the time being, it is lower energy prices and
hence base effects, as well as government interventions that are pushing down headline inflation,
not a broader-based disinflationary process.”

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US Treasury bonds
Equities
Markets Briefing
Martha Muir
Harriet Clarfelt

