FT PROFESSIONAL

Chris Giles on Central Banks Monetary policy

Lessons in monetary transmission

At Jackson Hole, central bankers offered different views about the tools of their trade

Grand Teton National Park, where central bankers gathered this week for the annual Jackson Hole symposium © Bloomberg

Elettra Ardissino
Published AUG 27 2024

This article is an on-site version of our Chris Giles on Central Banks newsletter. Premium
subscribers can sign up here to get the newsletter delivered every Tuesday. Standard
subscribers can upgrade to Premium here, or explore all FT newsletters

With the much-anticipated Federal Reserve pivot upcoming, reports about this year’s Jackson Hole
conference have mostly focused on indications about the trajectory of interest rates in the next few
months.

While central bankers broadly agreed that easing is on the cards in the near term, there was less
consensus about the issue that gave the conference its theme: monetary transmission and its
effectiveness.
Policymakers appear to have reached different conclusions about whether the monetary tools
available to them have worked as intended over the past few years. What’s more, they also seem to
have different ideas about whether monetary transmission will work in predictable ways when the
next crisis hits.
Let’s look at the conclusions of each central banker — and what they can learn from each other:

Powell: business as usual
For all its cautiousness, Fed chair Jay Powell’s keynote address projected an overarching sense of
confidence in a job well done.
His diagnosis of the US economy’s issues over the past few years was clear and confident. In his
telling, these challenges are now “fading”.
“Most of the rise in inflation [was due to] an extraordinary collision between overheated and
temporarily distorted demand and constrained supply,” he said. In this set of circumstances, the
Fed’s job was to “moderate aggregate demand, and [to anchor inflation] expectations”. He believes
it succeeded on both counts.
His speech offered two messages.
First, monetary transmission worked exactly as intended via financial conditions and expectations.
As Powell put it, “our restrictive monetary policy helped restore balance between aggregate supply
and demand, easing inflationary pressures and ensuring that inflation expectations remained well
anchored”.
Second, demand and supply shocks that caused inflation to rise above target did not bring
structural change to the US economy. The implication is that monetary tools that worked this time
can reasonably be expected to work in more or less exactly the same way when the next crisis hits.

What Powell did not mention is that in 2020 the Fed upgraded its policy framework to a new
formulation — flexible average inflation targeting — with the aim to “offset the downward bias to
inflation expectations exerted by the lower bound under inflation targeting”, as New York Fed
president John Williams put it. Under FAIT, future inflation is allowed to overshoot the 2 per cent
target when present inflation undershoots.
As Powell notes, inflation expectations have been well behaved in the US since then, falling sharply
from elevated levels in 2022. But if Fed rates do not go back to the lower bound, it could mean that
this time, the Fed has had more room to allow expectations to drift up than it will in the future.

US inflation expectations are slighly higher than pre-pandemic
Expected change in prices (%)
One year ahead

Five years ahead

5

4

3

Bailey: in the dark
Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey struck a far less confident tone.

First, he indicated that the BoE had not been entirely successful at managing inflation
expectations. “Intrinsic inflation persistence where price and wage setting behaviour does change
[ . . . ] is still with us,” he said, though he added that it had come down slightly over the past year.
Second, Bailey did not seem to have a clear sense of exactly what level of policy restriction would be
needed to squeeze out the remaining persistence — or, indeed, which of the various monetary
transmission channels would best achieve this goal.
“Is the decline of persistence now almost baked in [ . . . ] or will it also require a negative output gap
to open up, or are we experiencing a more permanent change to price, wage and margin setting
which would require monetary policy to remain tighter for longer?” he asked the audience.
Bailey’s uncertainty went further still. Elsewhere in his speech, he reflected that monetary
transmission may not have worked as policymakers expected this time — both because of the
significant structural changes to the economy since the last tightening cycle, and because of the
peculiarities of raising rates from near zero.
If the transition from ultra-easy to tight policy altered transmission, the point is relevant not just
for the BoE. In any case, he is right to point out that the global economy has changed a lot since the
last global tightening cycle.

Lane: helped by circumstances
Like Powell, the European Central Bank’s chief economist Philip Lane sounded confident that the
ECB’s policy stance had been transmitted as intended, though he noted that, as in the UK, “the
return to target is not yet secure”.
But his description of the various channels of monetary transmission reveals that it was facilitated
by a few external factors. At least some of these should not be expected to recur next time the ECB
needs to raise rates, meaning that in a future crisis the ECB’s playbook might also have to change.

In terms of the impact of restrictive policy on aggregate demand, Lane said that weaker consumer
confidence and skyrocketing energy prices after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine “reduced the extent of
demand dampening that needed to be generated by monetary tightening”. This implies that if the
next bout of high inflation is caused by a shock that works against tight policy, such as a positive
demand shock, monetary transmission will be less forceful. Lessons from the past tightening cycle
will not necessarily apply.
The ECB’s tightening campaign also prevented inflation expectations from becoming unanchored,
Lane said, but he also noted that “in the post-crisis years before the pandemic, expectations had
become de-anchored to the downside”.
In other words, Lane said explicitly what Powell omitted: the ECB had extra room to let mediumterm inflation expectations move up this time and could therefore adopt a gentler, more gradual
approach to tightening. With expectations now settled at a higher level than pre-pandemic, that
room may not be available next time.
It is also interesting to contrast Lane and Bailey’s conclusions about the impact of negative demand
and supply shocks, since they were similar in both the Eurozone and UK. While Lane seems to
believe that slowing real activity dragged on inflation, Bailey thinks that higher inflation
turbocharged expectations in a way that even very tight policy could not fully counter.
Data shows that measures of underlying inflation, including core and services, peaked higher in the
UK. Is the UK economy facing its own idiosyncratic issues, like low labour force participation, that
make it harder for high rates to rein in inflation? Or is Lane at risk of receiving a nasty surprise?

Measures of underlying inflation are lower in the Eurozone than in the UK
Annual change in consumer price index (%)
UK services inflation

UK core inflation

Eurozone services inflation

Eurozone core inflation

8

6

4

Understanding monetary transmission matters for central bankers. Knowing exactly how the tools
of the trade work lowers the risk of a costly policy mistake. We won’t know how Powell, Bailey and
Lane’s thoughts on the topic evolved after their weekend discussions at Jackson Lake Lodge — but
we know with reasonable confidence what questions they’ve come away with.

What I’ve been reading and watching
Former BoE chief economist Andy Haldane argues that, with disinflation
spreading and economic activity clearly weakening, it is time for central
banks to cast caution aside — or risk getting left behind.

Mohamed El-Erian also thinks that Powell failed to shed enough light on
the Fed’s rate path beyond September, but his main concern is that lack of
clarity has allowed markets to run with a narrative of untrammelled easing.
Only a few weeks after the early August whiplash, risks of another market
round-trip are building.
Writing ahead of Powell’s speech, Adam Posen thought the Fed chair
should use his platform to highlight the economic harms that some of
Trump’s campaign pledges would wreak on the US. He also said that, given
the foggy fiscal outlook, Powell should not rule out the possibility of raising
rates again next year.
Kamala Harris’s ideas on housing were poorly received but blogger Noah
Smith (Noahpinion) has a contrarian (and, I think, persuasive) piece on
why they might actually work.

A chart that matters
In 2022, central banks in the west began quantitative tightening with the aim of giving themselves
maximum firepower to respond to the next crisis whenever it hits.
But policymakers have different ideas about the endgame. The Fed wants to continue providing all
of the liquidity that the financial system needs while the BoE wants to reinstate liquidity on
demand, at least in part. The ECB is somewhere in between.
The central banks moved from scarce to ample reserves nearly in tandem after 2008. In the postCovid world, their balance-sheet management policies may diverge.
Wherever this complicated, slow-moving debate ends up, the Bank for International Settlements’
new database is an invaluable tool for those who follow it.

Western central banks' balance sheets are shrinking. Japan is the exception
Central bank assets (% GDP)
Japan

US

UK

Eurozone

100

50

0

Recommended newsletters for you
Free lunch — Your guide to the global economic policy debate. Sign up here
The State of Britain — Helping you navigate the twists and turns of Britain’s post-Brexit
relationship with Europe and beyond. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article

Global inflation
Central banks
Monetary policy
Federal Reserve
Jerome H. Powell

