FT PROFESSIONAL

Disrupted Times Covid-19

Reassessing the inflation threat
Also in this edition: Sunak holds back on EU science programme, company exodus from London to New York,
Xi’s ‘forceful’ overhaul of China’s government

Public transport workers in Hanover and other German cities took strike action today in support of a 10.5% pay increase to keep up
with rising inflation © Getty Images

Darren Dodd
Published MAR 3 2023

Today’s top stories
Germany has asked Switzerland to sell some of its decommissioned
Leopard 2 tanks as it struggles to cobble together two battalions of the
fighting vehicles to send to Ukraine.

UK prime minister Rishi Sunak is refusing to rush Britain back into the
EU’s €95.5bn Horizon science programme, despite the prospect being
hailed by the country’s scientists. Academics separately warned of the
closure of more than 150 projects as EU funding that has supported them
tapers out.
CRH, the world’s largest building materials company, is planning to move
its listing from London to New York in a new blow to the UK’s capital
market alongside SoftBank’s rejection of a London listing for Cambridgebased chip designer Arm. Boards of other companies are discussing similar
moves. The trend was shrugged off by London Stock Exchange chief David
Schwimmer.
For up-to-the-minute news updates, visit our live blog

Good evening.
The stream of hot inflation numbers over the past month has pushed US borrowing costs to 2007
levels, intensifying the debate about how high interest rates have to go to rein in soaring consumer
prices.
“I don’t recall this dramatic of a reassessment of economic conditions in such a short time period,
with the exception of major shocks like Covid-19 and the collapse of Lehman Brothers,” said Rick
Rieder, an investment officer at BlackRock, the world’s largest money manager.
US labour costs for the last quarter were yesterday revised up, adding to central bank concerns, as
our Big Read explains, that high pay settlements will keep inflation at elevated levels.
The news on labour costs follows a jump in the core personal consumption expenditures price
index, the Federal Reserve’s preferred gauge of inflation, and a less-than-expected cooling in the
consumer price index.

The stronger-than-forecast run of data continued today with new information on the US services
sector, reinforcing fears that the Fed would keep interest rates higher for longer to combat the
inflationary threat.
There are also renewed inflation fears across the Atlantic.
New data yesterday showed eurozone consumer price growth dipping only slightly from 8.6 per
cent to 8.5 per cent in January. Analysts now think the European Central Bank will keep raising
rates beyond an expected 0.5 percentage point increase on March 16. In Germany, the bloc’s
biggest economy, inflation actually increased from 9.2 per cent to 9.3 per cent, with similar rises in
France and Spain.
The UK outlook is different, according to Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey. He signalled to
financial markets on Wednesday that it was wrong to assume the BoE would raise rates any
further. Unlike in the US and the eurozone, British inflation had not outstripped forecasts and the
economy was “evolving much as we expected it to,” Bailey said. The BoE still expects inflation to
fall rapidly, particularly in April when energy bills are likely to rise by much less than at the same
time a year ago.
Other aspects of the UK cost of living crisis are as serious as ever: new survey data on Tuesday
showed record rises in food prices in February of 17.1 per cent would add £811 to the average
British household’s annual bill.
Part of the uncertainty in markets around inflation is down to central banks struggling to
communicate their intentions, writes Andy Haldane, former BoE chief economist and new FT
contributing editor.
Unless they show a bit more imagination on targets, he writes, the “mini-monetary mistakes of the
recent past” are likely to morph into the “maxi-monetary mistakes of the future”.
Browse our global inflation tracker to see how your country compares.

Need to know: UK and Europe economy
Columnist Helen Thomas says this week’s Brexit deal is still a bit of a “nothingburger” for the
City, while Welsh first minister Mark Drakeford told the FT it created “perverse incentives” to
move freight destined only for Northern Ireland to direct routes, diverting business away from the
Welsh ports of Holyhead and Fishguard. Hopes however are rising that the deal could enable UK
participation in the CPTPP transpacific trade bloc.
UK government plans to revoke all EU-derived legislation will cause more uncertainty and do
nothing to increase economic growth, according to two-thirds of businesses in a new poll.
The Centre for Cities think-tank blamed the UK’s weak productivity on a slowdown in London,
saying the capital since 2007 had trailed behind Paris, Brussels and New York and could benefit
from more devolution. Economics editor Chris Giles suggests less restrictive planning regulations,
and more liberal immigration policies for high-skilled employees could also help.

Need to know: Global economy
Chinese president Xi Jinping is poised to launch a “forceful” overhaul of his government at the
annual National People’s Congress, which begins on Sunday. His most trusted acolytes are set to
oversee key sectors including finance and tech, strengthening the Communist party’s grip on the
economy.
Brazil’s economy shrank 0.2 per cent in the final quarter of 2022, highlighting the challenges
ahead for president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva. The weak performance, driven by shrinking
industrial output and a cooling of services activity, ended five consecutive quarters of growth.
Western allies are pushing the United Arab Emirates to halt exports of critical goods to Russia
and clamp down on suspected sanctions busting.

Need to know: business
Arm was also in the news over China’s blocking of the plan to offload its troubled joint venture
in the country. Chinese officials are determined to keep the company directly involved in the unit at
a time when the US is trying to cut the country off from cutting-edge chip technologies.
Korean chipmakers have expressed alarm over the tough conditions for US subsidies such as
sharing excess profits. Companies editor Anne-Sylvaine Chassany says Joe Biden can teach the EU
a lesson or two on big-state “dirigisme”.
Washington has put 28 Chinese groups on a trade blacklist for allegedly breaching US sanctions
by sending technology for nuclear and missile programmes to third countries or procuring banned
products for China’s military.
The global economy may be weak but the appetite for flying remains strong. Low cost airlines
are reporting record booking sprees, US carriers cannot find enough planes and Air India has
placed one of the biggest orders in aviation history. Lufthansa today said revenues had doubled,
while Qantas said it would add 8,500 new jobs.
If you haven’t been following the scandal at South Africa’s Eskom, our Big Read has it all,
including a tale of cyanide-laced coffee.

Science round up
The lab leak theory is back. A new assessment from the US energy department and comments
from the FBI that Covid-19 sprung from a Chinese laboratory have rekindled a fierce political
debate in Washington.
Mistakes thrown up by Generative AI programmes are sowing seeds of doubt in serious science,
says commentator Anjana Ahuja. Investors are less worried: Inflection AI, a one-year-old startup, is on course to have raised up to $1bn in just a year. US editor at large Gillian Tett is sceptical
about AI possibilities in the property industry.

Scientists are aiming to develop a “biological computer” powered by millions of human brain
cells. “Organoid intelligence” could outperform silicon-based machines while consuming far less
energy if the scientists are successful, with the first applications in neuroscience and medicine.
A US biotech is trialling the active ingredient in magic mushrooms as a potential therapy for
anorexia. Global pharma correspondent Hannah Kuchler explores the potential for psychedelics
and how a break with reality can transform people’s relationship with the real world.
Wildfires in subarctic boreal forests are emitting rapidly increasing amounts of carbon dioxide,
according to a study using new satellite technology. On a more positive note, the International
Energy Agency said the fall in gas supplies from Russia had tempered the rise in emissions in
Europe.
“I do not see us having a problem getting to Mars.” British astronaut Tim Peake gives a wideranging interview on the future of space exploration to the FT’s Henry Mance.

Some good news
People across the UK have been treated to a stunning display of the aurora borealis or northern
lights twice this week. Favourable meteorological conditions over the next two years mean the
prospects for Brits witnessing the phenomenon again are growing.

Something for the weekend
The FT Weekend interactive crossword will be published here on Saturday, but in the meantime
why not try today’s cryptic crossword?

Interactive crosswords on the FT app

Subscribers can now solve the FT’s Daily Cryptic, Polymath and FT Weekend crosswords on the
iOS and Android apps

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
Global inflation
Covid-19
Disrupted Times
Darren Dodd

