FT PROFESSIONAL

Federal Reserve

Federal Reserve minutes highlight deep fissures at US central bank
Policymakers sparred over decision to cut interest rates earlier in December

The dissents against the December rate cut highlight the scale of the challenge facing Fed chair Jay Powell’s successor © AFP/Getty
Images

Claire Jones, US Economics Editor
Published DEC 30 2025 | Updated DEC 30 2025, 16:34

US rate-setters clashed at their meeting this month over whether or not to prioritise fighting
inflation over a cooling labour market, minutes of one of the most divided monetary policy votes in
recent decades highlighted.
While many Federal Reserve policymakers said the latest data indicated President Donald Trump’s
trade war would not trigger persistent price pressures, several rate-setters “pointed to the risk of
higher inflation becoming entrenched”, the minutes of the December 9-10 meeting, published on
Tuesday, said.

Several rate-setters voiced concerns that cutting interest rates could be “misinterpreted” as
signalling the central bank was no longer committed to keeping price pressures under control, the
minutes added.
The minutes chronicle a meeting when three votes were against the decision to cut US borrowing
costs by a quarter point to a range of 3.5 per cent to 3.75 per cent — dissent on a scale not seen
since 2019. The last time there were more dissents was in the early 1990s.
Austan Goolsbee, head of the Chicago Fed, joined his counterpart at the Kansas City Fed, Jeffrey
Schmid, in voting to keep borrowing costs on hold. Fed governor Stephen Miran, an ally of Trump,
reiterated his call for a deeper 0.5 percentage-point cut.
So-called dot-plots, which show US rate-setters’ projections for borrowing costs and the economy,
indicated another four regional Fed presidents would have supported holding interest rates steady
in an attempt to cool persistently elevated consumer price growth.
The minutes also reveal that among the nine rate-setters who backed the cut, “a few” said “the
decision was finely balanced or that they could have supported keeping the target range
unchanged”.
At 2.8 per cent, personal consumption expenditures inflation for September remains well above
the 2 per cent level the Fed targets.
A separate report on consumer prices for October suggested inflationary pressure could be cooling.
However, many economists say that fall was partly down to flaws in data collection caused by the
recent government shutdown and methodologies the Bureau of Labor Statistics used to produce
the report.
Meanwhile, figures for third-quarter growth showed the US economy expanded by a stronger than
anticipated 4.3 per cent annualised rate.
The dissents against the December cut — the third quarter-point reduction in as many votes —
highlight the scale of the challenge facing Fed chair Jay Powell’s successor when he relinquishes
the role in May 2026.

Trump on Monday said he would likely name his pick to succeed Powell as chair “sometime” in
January.
National Economic Council director and close ally Kevin Hassett is seen as favourite for the role.
Former Fed governor Kevin Warsh and current governor Christopher Waller, who was first among
the central bank’s leadership to call for rate cuts, have also been interviewed for the role.
Trump has made a willingness to aggressively cut borrowing costs a prerequisite for winning the
nomination, with the president insisting interest rates should be as low as 1 per cent to strengthen
the world’s biggest economy.
But Powell signalled after the December vote that the bar to more cuts was high.
Many of the regional Fed presidents who are most concerned about inflation will hold voting rights
in 2026 — including Cleveland’s Beth Hammack, the Dallas Fed’s Lorie Logan and the head of the
Minneapolis Fed Neel Kashkari.
The minutes also acknowledged policymakers were concerned about the stigma associated with
financial companies tapping a key Fed tool that is meant to reduce pressures in money markets.
The standing repo facility, or SRF, was set up in 2021 to keep short-term funding costs close to
official interest rates.
But Roberto Perli, a senior New York Fed official, told the Fed’s rate-setting board that on certain
days, a “large” amount of borrowing was done at interest rates in excess of what the facility
charges.
The minutes blamed “misperceptions about the intended purpose” of the SRF for the reluctance to
use it, with market contacts calling for the operations to be centrally cleared and the $500bn-a-day
limit on usage to be scrapped.
Perli also advised the Fed to restart bond purchases as soon as this month in an attempt to get
ahead of shortages of cash anticipated during the early months of 2026 — a move that rate-setters
approved.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
US economy
US inflation
US interest rates
Central banks

