FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Markets Insight

Fed needs to cut interest rates sooner rather than later
Delay by US central bank in easing monetary policy could jeopardise soft economic
landing

MOHAMED EL-ERIAN

Delaying the first rate cut increases the likelihood that, ultimately, the Fed, chaired by Jay Powell, will need to cut more to minimise
the risk of recession © Getty Images

Mohamed El-Erian
Published JUN 17 2024

The writer is president of Queens’ College, Cambridge, and an adviser to Allianz and Gramercy
“It doesn’t matter when the Federal Reserve starts cutting rates. What really matters is where they
finish.” That is one view that is being heard around Wall Street.
At first glance, this advice serves as a timely caution for the many market participants currently
obsessed with whether the Federal Reserve, reassured by the latest inflation data, will begin its
rate-cutting cycle in September or wait longer, as several Fed officials suggested last week.

However, this opinion overlooks the significance of the timing of the first cut. In current
circumstances, the timing is crucial for determining the cumulative magnitude of the cycle and the
economy’s wellbeing.
The usual argument for the importance of timing posits that the first rate reduction allows markets
to price the entirety of the cutting cycle with greater confidence. This seems less important given
today’s overly data-dependent Fed, which has refrained from taking a strategic view and,
regrettably, seems unlikely to change this approach any time soon.
This lack of policy anchoring has robbed the fixed-income markets of an important steer. You see
this in the behaviour of US treasury yields, be it the policy-sensitive 2-year bond, or the 10-year
which captures more comprehensive market views of the whole rate cycle as well as inflationary
and growth outcomes.
In just the four weeks before the last Fed policy meeting, the 2-year yield fluctuated significantly:
rising to almost 5 per cent, then falling by 0.26 percentage points, increasing by 0.18 points, and
dropping again by 0.22 points to a low of 4.67 per cent. The 10-year yield exhibited similar
volatility, though with larger magnitudes.
The stronger argument for the importance of timing relates to the state of the economy. Mounting,
though not yet universal, data signal economic weakening, including deteriorating forward-looking
indicators. This has coincided with a significant erosion of balance sheet buffers held by small
businesses and lower-income households. The vulnerabilities, likely to increase as more of the
lagged effects of the large 2022-23 hiking cycle take hold, come amid significant cyclical economic
and political volatility, as well as transitions in areas such as technology, sustainable energy, supply
chain management and trade.

Treasury moves have been volatile so far in 2024
US government yields (%)

4.92

4.64

There is also the historical perspective suggesting that a timely rate cut contributes to better
economic outcomes. As Bob Michele of JPMorgan emphasised in a Bloomberg Television interview
last week, a swift rate cut played a significant role in delivering a “soft landing” after the 3
percentage point hiking cycle in 1994-95, a rare occurrence in history. This historical precedent
should instil a sense of optimism, suggesting that a well-timed rate cut could potentially lead to a
similar positive outcome in the current economic landscape (a soft landing probability that I place
at 50 per cent right now).
Given the inflation dynamics, pushing back the first rate cut increases the likelihood that,
ultimately, the Fed will need to cut more to minimise the risk of recession. This scenario would
constitute an inverse of the Fed’s initial 2021-22 policy mistake. By mischaracterising then
inflation as “transitory” and delaying its policy reaction, the Fed had to increase rates aggressively
by over 5 percentage points, including four successive hikes of 0.75 percentage points.

If, this time around, the Fed is forced into a large cutting cycle due to a delayed start and
accelerating economic and financial weaknesses, it would also have to end up cutting by more than
necessary based on longer-term conditions. This follows the previous upside overshoot that
exposed pockets of financial vulnerability and, internationally, the policy challenges facing many
other countries.
Once again, vulnerable households and small businesses would be most exposed to such an
overshoot. The benefits of lower rates would be overshadowed by increased income insecurity or
outright unemployment.
Rather than a given, the terminal rate for the upcoming Fed rate reduction cycle depends on when
it starts. The longer central bankers wait to cut, the more the economy risks unnecessary harm to
its growth prospects and financial stability, hitting the more vulnerable segments particularly hard.
In the process, the Fed would be stuck again with a reactive policy reaction that firefights rather
than a more strategic one that guides the economy to the soft landing many of us are hoping for
and the world desperately needs.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Mohamed El-Erian
Markets Insight
Global Economy
US interest rates
Central banks

