FT PROFESSIONAL

Market Questions Japanese economy

Did US inflation ease again in August?
Market Questions is the FT’s guide to the week ahead

A train wrapped with a ‘Beat Inflation’ advertisement for a California-based discount store chain. Some economists say consumers
have started to spend less on goods © AFP via Getty Images

Alexandra White, Valentina Romei and Eri Sugiura
Published SEP 11 2022

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel

Did US inflation ease for the second month in a row?
Lower petrol prices should have helped slow the pace of inflation in the US in August for the
second month in a row. But the Federal Reserve is unlikely to be swayed from implementing a
steep interest rate rise later in September, as inflation remains well above its target with persistent
growth in services prices.

Economists polled by Reuters forecast that the US consumer price index fell 0.1 per cent monthon-month in August, after remaining flat in July. They expect a year-on-year reading of 8.1 per cent
for August, down from 8.5 per cent a month earlier.
Lower energy prices were largely responsible for driving down inflation in July, and the same trend
is likely to have continued the following month as petrol costs fell further.
Some economists said that consumers have started to spend less on goods, while businesses have
increased supply of their products to match demand, which may also contribute to a decrease in
price growth.
“Inflationary pressure on goods prices has clearly eased and some overheated prices, for example
used cars, are starting to fall in absolute terms,” said Solita Marcelli, chief investment officer for
the Americas at UBS Global Wealth Management.
But despite the expected moderation in the August report, the Fed has still signalled that it will
continue to tighten monetary policy, as inflation remains well above the central bank’s target. Chair
Jay Powell and vice-chair Lael Brainard vowed last week to keep raising rates, fuelling expectations
that a third consecutive 0.75 percentage point increase will be implemented later this month.
Demand for services has strengthened, which Marcelli said has caused more “persistent pressure”
on this component of the consumer price index.
Core inflation, which excludes energy and food prices, is forecast to have edged up 0.4 per cent
month-on-month in August, following a reading of 0.3 per cent in July.
Housing costs are a large contributor to the services component of the index and shelter costs are
expected to continue rising, led by rental price growth.
“The biggest single contribution to the month-to-month core CPI print will come from housing
rents,” said Ian Shepherdson at Pantheon Economics. “But we see a decent chance that the pace of
rent increases has now peaked, though the uncertainty here is still great, given the unprecedented
conditions in the rental market.” Alexandra White

Did UK inflation pick up pace in August?
UK inflation data for August are expected to offer no respite. Economists polled by Reuters forecast
that the annual pace of consumer price growth accelerated from a 40-year high of 10.1 per cent in
July to 10.4 per cent last month.
A consumer price index reading at that level would confirm that the UK is the only G7 economy
with a double-digit inflation rate. It would also intensify pressure on the Bank of England to raise
interest rates again, having already implemented six consecutive increases to 1.75 per cent.
The inflation outlook for the UK and the rest of Europe worsened over the summer, reflecting
surging European wholesale gas prices following a squeeze on Russian energy flows to the rest of
the continent. Even before the gas price peaked in late August, the BoE had forecast that inflation
would soar to 13 per cent in January, causing a prolonged economic recession.
However, the medium-term inflation forecast has been mitigated to an extent by an energy package
announced last week by new UK prime minister Liz Truss, which included a freeze on average
annual household energy bills at £2,500 over the next two years.
Truss’s government expects the intervention to curb inflation by up to 5 percentage points.
Paul Dales, chief UK economist at Capital Economics, said the measure would lower the expected
peak inflation to 11.5 per cent in November from the level of 14.5 per cent previously forecast for
January, and would make inflation fall faster next year.
However, he thinks that because the stimulus supports economic activity, “it will boost inflation
further ahead”. Valentina Romei

Did Japan’s trade deficit expand last month?
Surging commodity prices and rising import costs due to a weaker yen have knocked the Japanese
economy in recent times, forcing it to record a trade deficit for 12 consecutive months through to
the end of July. The big question, as downward pressure on the currency continues to build, is
whether the trend continued in to August.

Japan posted a trade deficit of ¥1.43tn ($10bn) for July, and clocked record-high import costs for
the fifth consecutive month. The offset of a cheaper currency — more competitive exports — has yet
to make a definitive mark. Despite the historic depreciation of the yen, which has weakened by
about a fifth against the dollar this year to more than ¥140, export growth has been limited due to
the disruption of semiconductor production and other component shortages.
Analysts suspect the world’s third-largest economy is likely to have taken a further hit in August,
with the yen sliding to a fresh 24-year low against the US currency in recent days as the Bank of
Japan remained committed to its ultra-loose monetary policy even as the Federal Reserve
continued to raise interest rates.
Economists are divided about whether the trade deficit expanded last month. Goldman Sachs
economist Naohiko Baba expects the deficit to have widened to ¥2.47tn, estimating that export
volumes have declined slightly year-on-year. Weakening demand for exports in the US has affected
the move, he added.
Increasing cases of Covid-19 and subsequent lockdowns in China as well as a decline in production
in the country due to drought are likely to affect Japanese exports, he noted.
Citigroup economist Kiichi Murashima, meanwhile, believes the trade deficit narrowed in August
as supply constraints eased, driving car exports. Eri Sugiura

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Japanese economy
UK inflation
US inflation
US interest rates
Markets

