FT PROFESSIONAL

US Treasury bonds

US real yields hit record low on growth concerns
Sharp fall comes as inflation expectations have dipped only slightly

Negative real yields pose a big problem for pension funds and other long-term asset allocators that are also grappling with equity
markets trading at high valuations © FT montage

Tommy Stubbington in London
Published JUL 26 2021

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
The returns investors expect to earn after inflation on the world’s most important government
bonds have reached a record low in a fall that has had sweeping implications across global markets.
The real yield on 10-year US Treasuries fell further below zero on Monday as growing anxiety over
the outlook for economic growth added fuel to a recent rally in bond markets.

The real yield — which measures the returns investors can expect once inflation is taken into
account — sank to minus 1.127 per cent as a stock market sell-off drove Asia investors into the
safety of government debt.
Real yields in the eurozone also traded at all-time lows on Monday, with the 10-year real interest
rate swap — a key gauge of future interest rates across the currency bloc — hitting minus 1.65 per
cent.
Negative real yields pose a big problem for pension funds and other long-term asset allocators that
are also grappling with equity markets trading at high valuations.

One effect of deeply negative real yields is to buoy a range of other asset classes, as they make the
returns they offer more attractive in comparison to bonds. Last year, investors said record-low real
yields were driving an “everything rally” from gold to stock markets.
A relentless advance in bond markets over the past few weeks has surprised many investors, who
had been betting on a further rise in yields after a big sell-off at the start of the year.

While many have pointed the finger at investor positioning and thin summer trading conditions to
explain the moves, they have also been fed by a reassessment of optimistic global growth
expectations as the Delta coronavirus variant spreads.
Nominal bond yields have fallen sharply from their highs in March at a time when inflation
expectations have dipped only slightly, driving real yields beneath last year’s record trough.
The US 10-year break-even rate — the gap between real yields and nominal yields that serves as a
gauge of investors’ inflation expectations over the coming decade — was at 2.33 per cent on
Monday, down from levels of more than 2.5 per cent seen in May but still higher than the Federal
Reserve’s 2 per cent target.
“Even though the underlying growth backdrop is very strong, the market has moved from thinking
about reflation to maybe a little bit of stagflation fear,” said Jamie Fahy, global macro strategist at
Citi, referring to a combination of low growth and high inflation.
The unease in markets is building ahead of Wednesday’s Fed policy meeting, at which chair Jay
Powell may offer clues about the US central bank’s timetable for winding down its bond-buying
programme, which has supported markets through the pandemic. Traders have scaled back their
expectations for how quickly the Fed will raise interest rates amid a more uncertain economic
outlook.
The prospect of rock-bottom rates for longer is a recipe for falling real yields and signals that the
Fed — and other central banks — will be more tolerant of a rise in inflation expectations, according
to Peter Chatwell, head of multi-asset strategy at Mizuho.
“Real yields are telling us the truth about how Fed policy will translate into considerably higher
inflation over the medium term,” he said.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US Treasury bonds
US inflation
Tommy Stubbington

