FT PROFESSIONAL

US Treasury bonds

US Treasury to sell more short-term debt in continuation of Biden-era policy
Treasury secretary Scott Bessent previously criticised issuance of short-term bills as means of keeping longterm interest rates stable

Despite disavowing the practice before he took office, Scott Bessent has adopted the debt management strategy of his predecessor
Janet Yellen © via Reuters

Kate Duguid in New York
Published JUL 30 2025

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
The US Treasury will issue more short-term debt to help fund its widening budget deficit, a
continuation of a Biden-era policy that Treasury secretary Scott Bessent had previously disavowed.

The Treasury department said on Wednesday that it would keep the size of its auctions of longerdated bonds steady over the next “several quarters”. This suggests a vast increase in issuance of
shorter-term debt — Treasury bills that mature in anything between a week and a year — to meet
the $1tn the department needs this quarter to keep the government running.
Despite disavowing it before he took office, Bessent has adopted the debt management strategy of
his predecessor Janet Yellen. Skewing its debt issuance to more shorter-dated bonds allows the
government to step up its borrowing without sending yields on longer-dated bonds higher. The
yields — which move inversely to prices — of longer-dated bonds determine interest rates across
the economy, from the government’s borrowing costs to mortgage rates.
The department said on Monday it would raise $1tn in the three months to September, up sharply
from the $554bn it estimated for the April to June quarter. The increase is primarily due to
technical needs because of the debt limit. Over the past two decades, increasing auction sizes have
reflected the US government’s expansion of borrowing to fund tax cuts and spending programmes.
The current debt strategy is somewhat risky because of the quick turnover of short-term debt. Each
time that such debt matures — at least once a year — it must be replaced by new debt issued at
current interest rates. If rates were to rise, the Treasury department’s debt burden would grow.
When Yellen began relying more on short-term debt to plug the government’s financing needs,
Stephen Miran — now head of President Donald Trump’s Council of Economic Advisers — and
economist Nouriel Roubini wrote an academic paper on the practice, calling it “activist Treasury
issuance”, which they said was tantamount to “stealth quantitative easing”.
They argued that, by relying on shorter-term debt, the government was artificially depressing
longer-term rates and that the Treasury department was thereby enacting monetary policy, which
is traditionally the role of the Federal Reserve.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US Treasury bonds
US budget
US Department of the Treasury
Scott Bessent
Kate Duguid

