FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Markets Insight

Why it might be the time to repeal the Fed’s dual mandate
Should 3% be the US central bank’s new inflation target?

EDWARD YARDENI

Fed chair Jay Powell acknowledged that inflation remains ‘somewhat elevated relative to our 2% longer-run goal’ © Getty Images

Edward Yardeni
Published SEP 18 2025

The writer is president and chief investment strategist at Yardeni Research
In the 2018 remake of A Star Is Born, Bradley Cooper sings a song titled “Maybe It’s Time To Let
The Old Ways Die”. The music comes to mind when thinking about the Federal Reserve after its
latest policy meeting. Maybe it’s time to get rid of the Fed’s dual mandate, which requires the
central bank to achieve maximum employment and price stability.

That requirement was set by Congress in the Humphrey-Hawkins Act of 1978. It amended the
Federal Reserve Act and required the central bank to pursue these two primary goals, which have
often conflicted in the past, and are doing so again now. The Fed’s original mandate in the Federal
Reserve Act of 1913 was to maintain financial stability.
The Fed first explicitly adopted a 2 per cent inflation target in January 2012. This was formalised in
a statement by the policy-setting Federal Open Market Committee, which announced a long-run
goal of 2 per cent inflation, measured by the annual change in the Personal Consumption
Expenditures (PCE) price index. The decision was part of an effort to anchor inflation expectations
and provide clarity on the Fed’s monetary policy objectives.
The FOMC doesn’t have an explicit target for the unemployment rate. Still, the FOMC’s current
consensus, as shown in the committee’s Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), is that the “longrun” unemployment rate is around 4.2 per cent. The jobless rate was 4.3 per cent in August, and
the PCE inflation rate was 2.6 per cent in July. The FOMC tends to focus on core inflation, which
excludes the volatile components of food and energy. On this basis, inflation was at 2.9 per cent in
July.
This combination suggests that the Fed has met its employment mandate and is nearing its
inflation goal. So, why did the FOMC vote to lower the benchmark federal funds rate by 0.25
percentage points this week? That’s the first cut this year, and followed several months when Fed
officials frequently said that they were in no hurry to lower interest rates.
In his post-meeting press conference on Wednesday afternoon, Fed chair Jay Powell acknowledged
that inflation remains “somewhat elevated relative to our 2 per cent longer-run goal.” However, he
added that the FOMC is concerned about the recent significant slowing in payroll employment.
Could that be a sign of things to come with the Fed spending the next several years failing to bring
inflation down to its 2 per cent target because it has decided that the labour market requires more
of its attention? When the Fed undershot its inflation target from 2012 through 2021, it embraced
ultra-easy monetary policies. Now that inflation is overshooting the target, the Fed may hesitate to
tighten policy, fearing an increase in the unemployment rate.

US inflation remains stubbornly above the Fed’s 2% target
Personal Consumption Expenditures Price index, yearly % change

8

6

4

If that is the case, inflation might remain around 3.0 per cent. The labour market is currently
challenging to read but consider the following:
• Immigration has declined sharply. The foreign-born population and labour force have dropped by
1.9mn to 48.5mn and 1.5mn to 32.2mn, respectively, from March through August, according to the
Bureau of Labor Statistics.
• Retiring baby boomers might explain why the labour force participation rate is falling. Many of
them have postponed retirement. But time is catching up with them. The oldest of them will turn
80 next year. They are hard to replace with new workers with less experience.
• Many companies may have hiring freezes because of uncertainty attributable to the Trump
administration’s tariff policies. Many of them may also be holding back on expanding their payrolls
while they assess whether AI technologies might be a productivity-enhancing alternative.

Lowering interest rates really can’t resolve such structural issues. Instead, rate cuts would probably
boost demand for goods and services. That could push up wage and price inflation, given that many
of the labour market’s problems appear to stem more from a shortage of supply than from not
enough demand.
Fed officials comfort themselves by claiming the federal funds rate level remains restrictive, given
their long-term projection for it is 3.0 per cent. But that’s becoming increasingly difficult to believe,
given that real GDP growth is on track to exceed 3.0 per cent during the third quarter, after rising
to 3.3 per cent during the prior quarter.
And if the Fed is on track to overshoot inflation for some time, then the FOMC might as well raise
their explicit inflation target to 3.0 per cent. Or, better yet, maybe it’s time to get rid of the dual
mandate and have the Fed focus on financial stability, including keeping a lid on inflation.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Edward Yardeni
Markets Insight
US inflation
US interest rates
Central banks

