FT PROFESSIONAL

US interest rates

Federal Reserve official Michelle Bowman calls for interest rate cut as soon as July
Vice-chair for financial supervision says Donald Trump’s tariffs will have smaller effect on inflation than
feared

Michelle Bowman says recent data has ‘not shown clear signs of material impacts from tariffs and other policies’ © Reuters

Claire Jones in Washington and Martin Arnold in New York
Published JUN 23 2025 | Updated JUN 23 2025, 15:37

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
Federal Reserve vice-chair for financial supervision Michelle Bowman has called for an interest
rate cut as soon as July, saying President Donald Trump’s trade war would have a smaller effect on
inflation than some economists fear.
Bowman’s remarks on Monday come after Christopher Waller, another Fed governor, said on
Friday that the US central bank should consider cutting rates as soon as next month — highlighting
a divide between central bank officials over how they should respond to Trump’s tariffs.

Bowman indicated that she would support a cut as soon as next month as recent data had “not
shown clear signs of material impacts from tariffs and other policies” and that the inflationary
effect of the trade war “may take longer, be more delayed, and have a smaller effect than initially
expected”.
“All considered, ongoing progress on trade and tariff negotiations has led to an economic
environment that is now demonstrably less risky,” Bowman said. “As we think about the path
forward, it is time to consider adjusting the policy rate.”
The two-year Treasury yield, which is particularly sensitive to rate expectations, dropped to session
lows following Bowman’s comments. The yield was last down 0.08 percentage points to 3.82 per
cent as traders increased their bets on rate cuts this year.
Bowman, who took up her role this month after she was nominated by Trump earlier in 2025, also
pointed to “signs of fragility in the labour market” and said “we should put more weight on
downside risks to our employment mandate going forward”.
“Before our next meeting in July, we will have received one additional month of employment and
inflation data,” she said in Prague on Monday.
“If upcoming data show inflation continuing to evolve favourably, with upward pressures
remaining limited to goods prices, or if we see signs that softer spending is spilling over into
weaker labour market conditions, such developments should be addressed in our policy
discussions and reflected in our deliberations.”

US Fed officials hold steady in June
Each dot represents one FOMC participant's projection for the midpoint of US interest rates (%) from
every meeting since September 2024
Jun 2025

Mar 2025

Dec 2024

Sep 2024

5

Current rate
Current
rate
4

3

2

1

0

2025

2026

2027

Longer run

Source: Federal Reserve
FT graphic: Sam Learner

The Fed cut interest rates by 1 percentage point last year, but has been on pause since December,
with some officials reluctant to cut amid fears that the trade war could stoke another bout of
inflation.
The central bank’s latest projections, released last week, showed that seven officials think rates will
need to remain on hold at 4.25-4.5 per cent for the duration of this year to contain stronger price
pressures.

But 10 of 19 officials who contribute to the forecasts still think the Fed will be able to make two or
more cuts this year. Those in favour of cutting have pointed to tepid inflation data, with price
growth in services in particular weakening.
Bowman also discussed the Fed’s plan to kick off an overhaul of US banking regulations by
reforming the so-called supplementary leverage ratio, which sets how much high-quality capital
banks need to have against their total assets.
Banks have long been calling on regulators to ease the rule, complaining it punishes them for
holding low-risk assets such as US Treasuries and hinders their ability to facilitate trading in the
$29tn government debt market.
“The time has come for the federal banking agencies to revisit leverage ratios and their impacts on
the Treasury markets,” said Bowman.
The Fed is due to discuss changes to the rule at a meeting on Wednesday, when its board is
expected to agree to lower the minimum leverage ratio for the biggest banks from 5 per cent
currently to between 3.5 per cent and 4.5 per cent, bringing it in line with international peers.
The central bank is also planning a conference to discuss broader reform of US bank regulation
next month. Bowman said this could bring “many potential improvements” to what she called
“distorted capital requirements”.
Potential changes included adjusting various thresholds and capital rules to take account of
economic growth and inflation, she said. This could lower the extra capital buffer required of the
eight big US banks considered of global systemic importance.
The Fed also announced on Monday that it would no longer assess reputational risk in its
examinations of banks, eschewing a practice that critics claim has allowed officials to push lenders
to drop politically controversial clients or cryptocurrency companies.
“This change does not alter the board’s expectation that banks maintain strong risk management to
ensure safety and soundness and compliance with law and regulation,” it said.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Trump tariffs
Global Economy
US financial regulation
US economy
US inflation

