FT PROFESSIONAL

US inflation

US labour costs climb as inflationary pressures persist
Employment cost index registers 4% jump as companies try to lure workers in tight labour market

US employers have been raising wages as worker shortages in some industries have become more acute © Bloomberg

Colby Smith in Washington
Published JAN 28 2022 | Updated JAN 28 2022, 08:47

US labour costs have risen sharply, contributing to the rapid climb of inflation as the Federal
Reserve prepares to act forcefully to temper demand in the world’s largest economy.
The latest employment cost index (ECI) report, which tracks wages and benefits paid out by US
employers, showed total pay for civilian workers during the fourth quarter increased 1 per cent,
just shy of the record-setting 1.3 per cent jump seen between July and the end of September, and
slightly below economists’ expectations.

That translated to a 4 per cent jump for the 12-month period ending last month. Wages shot up 4.5
per cent during that window, nearly double the pace during the same time last year. Benefits rose
2.8 per cent.
Employers in the services sector confronted the biggest increases, with total pay rising 7.1 per cent.
For those in leisure and hospitality, costs jumped 8 per cent. Worker shortages that began to
intensify last year have been most acute in those industries, leading to heightened competition to
attract new talent and retain employees.
Sarah House, senior economist at Wells Fargo, called the slight moderation in the quarter-overquarter pace “encouraging”, but warned that the economy was not yet “out of the woods” when it
came to a worsening inflation situation.
Stephen Stanley, chief economist at Amherst Pierpont Securities, said: “If anything it feels like the
momentum is gaining and the first quarter of this year could be even firmer.”
He noted the bid-up in wages heading into the new year. “Unfortunately, that gives some staying
power to inflation [which] looks more and more entrenched,” he said.

Jay Powell, the Fed chair, cited the previous ECI release, which showed a 3.7 per cent increase in
total pay for the 12-month period ending September, as a primary reason why the central bank
decided in December to speed up the scaling back of its stimulus programme.
Rather than continuing to buy government bonds to the end of June, the Fed is now planning to
cease purchases of Treasuries and agency mortgage-backed securities in early March, right around
the time it is expected to begin raising interest rates for the first time since 2018.
The most recent data on labour costs were released on Friday alongside the Fed’s preferred
inflation gauge. The core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index increased 4.9 per
cent in December from the year before and another 0.5 per cent from the previous month.
That was a modest acceleration from the 4.7 per cent annual pace reported in November and the
fastest rise since September 1983. Once volatile items such as food and energy are factored in, the
PCE index jumped 5.8 per cent.

An increase in the price of goods drove the bulk of last month’s surge, rising 8.8 per cent in
December. Expenses related to services rose 4.2 per cent.
The PCE index is calculated slightly differently than its counterpart, the consumer price index,
which is running at a 7 per cent annual pace. The US commerce department also pulls from
different sources, relying on business surveys to formulate the PCE index, while the Bureau of
Labor Statistics looks at consumer surveys for the CPI.
The data reinforced the central bank’s decision to keep its options open for its monetary policy
path forward.
“Getting policy back to a more normal stance is the equivalent of stopping putting lighter fluid on
an already blazing bonfire,” said Stanley.
Powell refused on Wednesday, following the first two-day gathering of the Federal Open Market
Committee, to even rule out either raising interest rates at each of the seven remaining policy
meetings this year or considering supersized adjustments that bump up the federal funds rate by
half a percentage point, as opposed to the typical quarter-point increase.
Market expectations for the policy path forward have since shifted, with traders now pricing in
roughly four more interest rate increases in 2022 after “lift-off” from the current near-zero levels in
March.
Soaring inflation has forced the Fed to assume a much more hawkish stance than initially expected
just a couple of months ago. The labour market has also made significant strides and now appears
historically tight owing to a severe worker shortage.
Some economists warn that may be too aggressive, especially given that economic growth is
expected to slow down this year as consumption falls. Personal spending has already begun to
decline, falling 0.6 per cent in December from the previous month.
“Despite the strength of price and wage inflation, it is disappointingly weak real economic growth
that will prevent the Fed from delivering a full-blow Rate-maggedon this year,” said Paul
Ashworth, chief US economist at Capital Economics.

Powell on Wednesday reiterated that the central bank was “attentive” to the risks caused by
“persistent” wage growth, which he warned could lead to even higher inflation. “We have an
expectation about the way the economy is going to be evolved, but we’ve got to be in a position to
address different outcomes, including the one where inflation remains higher,” he later said.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US economy
US inflation
US interest rates
Colby Smith

