FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Unhedged

Inflation is rising, and it’s not just the tariffs
Plus the simplicity of the Mag 7

ROBERT ARMSTRONG

© FT montage

Robert Armstrong
Published AUG 1 2025

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
This article is an on-site version of our Unhedged newsletter. Premium subscribers can sign up
here to get the newsletter delivered every weekday. Standard subscribers can upgrade to
Premium here, or explore all FT newsletters

Good morning. A wild week for US economic data culminates today with the jobs report. As you
read the numbers, remember that Fed chair Jay Powell said this week: because the labour force is
shrinking, the absolute number of jobs created is less important now. The unemployment rate is
the number to watch. Whatever happens, send us your thoughts: unhedged@ft.com.

Inflation
Look at the dark blue line below, and answer a simple question: what direction has it been going
for the past six or eight months?

That dark blue line is inflation, as measured in the Personal Consumption Expenditures price
index, on a six-month rolling basis. And it is going up. All together now: inflation is rising. Not
maybe rising, not rising depending on what you include or exclude. Just Rising.

This is not because of some fiddly calculation the Department of Commerce does to impute some
price, or some rogue, highly volatile price throwing off the whole index. As Omair Sharif of
Inflation Insights pointed out to me, market-based (that is, no imputed prices used) core inflation
has started rising too, after progress there stalled more than a year ago. It’s a similar story with
trimmed mean PCE inflation.
What is more, inflation is not rising just because of tariffs.
The main culprit? Goods prices:

Notice two things. The rise in goods prices, which were falling outright in late 2024, proceeds the
“liberation day” tariffs by months. And services inflation, while it has been coming down a bit in
2025, has only got back to its 2024 lows on a rolling basis: the past four monthly numbers were
2.6, 1.8, 2.4, and 2.6 per cent, respectively. And, as Sharif points out, most of the progress in core
services is down to financial services prices, which in part reflect a lagged effect of the April/May
market swoon. That may not last.

Jason Furman of Harvard argues that this can’t all be down to tariffs:

The bigger nervousness is the non-tariff inflation, because that could be
more persistent. If we thought the story was 2.2 per cent core inflation and
tariffs were adding the rest, you would not be in the clear, but it would not be
that bad . . .
But overall core PCE inflation is 3 per cent and I have not seen any analysis
that says tariffs added a percentage point — all the analysis are in the [low]
tenths of a per cent.
Sharif, for example, estimates that we have seen between 0.15 and 0.2 per cent annual contribution
to inflation from tariffs now, for example. As of earlier this month, Goldman Sachs thought the
impact on year-to-date PCE prices was less than 0.1 per cent. And, Furman emphasises, the idea
that we have underlying inflation that is significantly above target is consistent with current levels
of wage growth. “Employment Cost index wages, average hourly earnings, the Atlanta Fed wage
tracker, they are all showing you wage growth you would expect in a 2.75 per cent inflation world,
so the idea that inflation tariffs aside is 2.5, 2.75, or 3 per cent is not crazy.”
We are far from the wretched days of 2022 and it seems very unlikely that we are heeded back
there. But we need to be clear that inflation, while it looked like it was just about whipped a year
ago, is still with us and unmistakably heading in the wrong direction. Rate cuts would be a bad
decision right now. And investors should be thinking about a scenario in which prices accelerate
further at the same time that (as we discussed yesterday) consumer demand seems to be
weakening.

The Magnificent Seven: it is not complicated
Apple and Amazon reported yesterday. Apple’s revenue was better than expected, giving the shares
a late bump, although tariff fears linger; Amazon’s outlook for high spending to come weighed on
its stock. The Magnificent Seven have all reported now (depending on how you treat Nvidia, whose
quarters end on a different schedule than the others). Who is winning and who is losing, and why?
There is a lot to pick through: AI spending and AI accomplishments, new products, tariff impacts,
strategy and on and on.
Stock performance should show us the consensus answer of the market to all those questions. Here
is how the Seven have done since the market last hit a proper bottom, in November of 2022:

How to make sense of that chart? Well, in one sense, the message is very simple indeed. The
market is saying that it will reward growth, and all the technological and strategic speculation, and
for that matter all the financial fundamentals besides growth, don’t matter much. Consider this
table:

Nvidia has performed by far the best, because its sales growth is by far the best. Meta is next best
on sales, and therefore on performance. The share performance of Amazon, Microsoft and
Alphabet are huddled together and so are their sales growth rate. Apple and Tesla? Bad growth,
bad performance. The wide divergence in cash flow among the companies since the market
bottomed doesn’t seem to correlate to performance after all.
Grow sales, the stock goes up. Occasionally the market is a pretty simple beast.

One good read
We love LA!

FT Unhedged podcast
Can’t get enough of Unhedged? Listen to our
new podcast, for a 15-minute dive into the
latest markets news and financial headlines,
twice a week. Catch up on past editions of
the newsletter here.

Recommended newsletters for you
Due Diligence — Top stories from the world of corporate finance. Sign up here
The Lex Newsletter — Lex, our investment column, breaks down the week’s key themes, with
analysis by award-winning writers. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Robert Armstrong
Unhedged
Big Tech
US economy
US inflation

