FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion US economy

Biden’s challenge runs deeper than ‘bad vibes’
The flaws in the economic system are real, and better ‘messaging’ won’t fix them

RUCHIR SHARMA

President Biden came to office promising to be the biggest spender since the New Deal © Andrew Harnik/Getty Images

Ruchir Sharma
Published JUN 2 2024

The writer is chair of Rockefeller International. His new book is ‘What Went Wrong With
Capitalism’
A key question still looming over the US election is why voters give Joe Biden so little credit for an
apparently robust economic recovery. Many observers dismiss this as a “vibecession” — a case of
bad “vibes” created by partisan media and divorced from reality — with only occasional apologies
for how condescending this sounds.

While it is a fact that the US economy has of late been growing at a relatively rapid pace, normal
people don’t live for quarterly GDP numbers, and their loss of faith in the system is a generational
story. Ninety per cent of Americans born in the 1940s grew up to earn more than their parents, but
that figure fell steadily to half of those born in 1980, and today barely more than a third of US
adults say they are better off than mom and dad.
With public debt at record highs, nearly half of Americans say they will depend on government
help in retirement — but most don’t trust the government to deliver promised benefits. Nearly
seven in 10 say the economic and political system needs “major changes or to be torn down
entirely”.
Biden came to office promising to be the biggest spender since the New Deal and is now running
deficits appropriate to a Depression amid a full-employment recovery. This helps explain why
current growth looks so good, and why trust in government continues a half century decline.
But this story goes beyond Biden and the US. While it can be argued that runaway government
spending has added to the misery — the average inflation rate under Biden is higher than under
any president since Jimmy Carter — public gloom about the economy has long been building
across developed nations.
For decades, economic growth has been slowing with rising inequality, and now leader approval
ratings in many western countries are at record lows. During his presidency, Donald Trump’s
approval ratings were also dismal despite a record low “misery index.”
Partisanship does play a role. Members of both US parties are increasingly likely to feel pessimistic
when a president of the other party is in power. Today, Republicans are the Americans most likely
to say the economy is getting worse. Still, nearly six in 10 independents agree, and in at least one
poll, Democrats give the economy even lower marks now than they did under Donald Trump. The
bad vibes are not just a recent creation of partisan US media.

Over time, public frustration seems to build on a sense that the system is “rigged” against the
average person. There are, as Biden’s defenders say, technical signs that inequality has fallen on his
watch, but take again the long view: in 2022, the income share of the richest 1 per cent topped 20
per cent for the first time since the 1940s. That’s according to the (progressive) World Inequality
Database, not Biden baiters.
Further, not only have the biggest American companies grown spectacularly relative to the rest,
they are also growing more entrenched, as are their owners. Wealth is rising fastest not for the 1
per cent but for the top tycoons, all of whom are — not coincidentally — in Big Tech.
“The Great Gatsby Curve” shows that highly unequal societies tend also to be the least mobile,
depriving capitalism of its inspiration: opportunity. By last year, political economist Blair Fix has
shown, the wealth of the richest American was 50 times the median for the top 400 billionaires, up
from 10 times in 1983. And even among billionaires, inequality begets immobility: top-50
billionaires are now roughly 40 per cent more likely to hold their place on the Forbes list from one
year to the next than they were in the 1980s.
There is a deep sense that America is increasingly dominated by a wealthy elite. They can afford the
$250,000 membership to new private restaurants, which are subdividing vibrant cities like New
York and Miami by income class. They set the rules in Washington and own the preponderant
share of stocks, bonds and assets of all kinds, so they prosper most when easy money policies drive
up the value of those assets. And also benefit when the government steps in to bail out the markets,
as it now always does at the first hint of trouble.
Most people, surveys show, would prefer a more modest salary than to live among richer
neighbours, yet that in effect is how Americans have no choice but to live now — in the shadows of
great wealth and power. It would be unfair to blame Biden alone for imbalances that have been
widening for decades, but it is also short sighted to suggest, as many have, that his main challenge
is to sell the good news harder. The flaws of capitalism in its current, twisted form are real. Better
“messaging” won’t whisper the resulting frustrations away.

Have your say

Joe Biden vs Donald Trump: tell us how the 2024 US election will affect you

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Ruchir Sharma
US economy
US presidential election 2024
US inequality
Global inequality

