FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Unhedged

Quantitative tightening, redux
And the return of services

ROBERT ARMSTRONG

© Financial Times

Robert Armstrong and Ethan Wu
Published FEB 3 2022

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
This article is an on-site version of our Unhedged newsletter. Sign up here to get the newsletter
sent straight to your inbox every weekday

Good morning. As if Spotify needed more problems, the streaming service ate dirt in after-hours
trading yesterday on a bad subscriber growth outlook. Facebook and PayPal lost as much as a
quarter of their share prices for similar reasons. Yet Google is doing just fine. Is there a pattern
here?
We’ll have more to say on earnings tomorrow. Today we think more about what QT means for
markets and one big way the economy is returning to normal. Email us: robert.armstrong@ft.com
and ethan.wu@ft.com.

What happens when the Fed balance sheet shrinks? (part 2)
Here are some striking comments about how quantitative easing and tightening work, from
someone who would know. Claudia Sahm of the Jain Family institute is an economist who worked
at the Fed for a decade. She spoke on a UBS webcast this week about how the US central bank will
tighten policy given low unemployment and high inflation:

The extra layer of problems here is that the Fed is very uncomfortable with
the balance sheet. That’s one area where I look at the robust debate among
the FOMC [Federal Open Market Committee] and I don’t feel so good.
Because they don’t know why it works or how it works. They don’t have
enough data points on this working well. They can’t talk about that much in
public because they don’t want to unsettle markets or themselves . . . lift-off
[of policy rates] is not the tricky thing here. It’s lift-off in a pandemic, it’s liftoff with a big balance sheet. How do you get out of [the QE] business?
The Fed does not know how its balance sheet operations affect the economy, and if they don’t
know, you should consider the possibility that you don’t know, either. The last time we talked
about this, a few weeks ago, we pointed out how the central bank delicately acknowledged its
puzzlement in its last set of minutes, writing that “there is less uncertainty about the effects of
changes in the federal funds rate on the economy than about the effects of changes in the . . .
balance sheet.”

Sahm continues:

[Markets] are probably going to have to deal with a flatter [rate] path and
more balance sheet runoff because, regardless of exactly how this works, this
is a signal from the Fed — ‘we’re walking away from pushing so hard on the
recovery.’ Because they do believe, and I think it’s pretty clear, that
quantitative easing, after [policy rates] hit the zero lower bound in 2020, did
help, whether it was through messaging or whether it was through pushing
down interest rates . . .
Whether [balance sheet runoff] is the same thing as a quarter point or 50
basis point [rate increase] we can argue about till the cows come home. But if
the Fed wants out of that business . . . that would make a lot of sense.
To rehearse what we said last time, the standard theory of what happens when the Fed buys or sells
treasury bonds is that, by changing the supply/demand balance for those bonds, they move yields
up or down, which encourages/discourages lending and borrowing in the economy. Nice theory,
but the facts are characteristically uncooperative. When the Fed started tightening last time, in
2018, rates were near their peak and fell as the central bank shrunk its balance sheet, the opposite
of what the standard theory would predict.
There is a somewhat more satisfying story of what balance sheet reduction will do to risk assets.
The Treasuries that the Fed is not buying have to be bought by someone else. And whoever that is
will be buying them instead of something else — something such as stocks and corporate bonds.
John Hussman of Hussman Funds, who catches a lot of hell for being bearish for the last decade
but brings rare rigour to market analysis, laid out the theory as follows in an email:

[During QE] the Fed purchases Treasury securities that would otherwise be
held by the public, and pays for them with essentially zero-interest base
money, which someone in the economy will have to hold until it is retired. As
the Fed forces people in the economy to hold much more zero-interest
liquidity than they want or need, they look for alternatives . . . [QE has]
created trillions of dollars in zero-interest hot potatoes that drive . . .
investors to chase yield in more speculative assets. Yet every time some
buyer uses the cash to buy a security, the seller ends up holding the damned
stuff.
What happens when the Fed runs off the balance sheet? . . . somebody is
being relieved of zero-interest but low-risk base money in return for an
interest-bearing but higher risk Treasury security. This doesn’t necessarily
drive the level of interest rates higher. But let’s be clear — it does finally
make someone happy with what they’re holding. And as the pile of zerointerest hot potatoes is reduced, so finally may the deranged level of yieldseeking speculation.
This “hot potato” theory of the Fed’s balance sheet has an interesting consequence.
Michael Howell of CrossBorder Capital summarises the theory like this: when there is less liquidity
in the system, there is more risk, and more risk aversion. The main reason for this is that when
there is a lot of cash around (Hussman’s “zero-interest base money”) it is easy to refinance
maturing debts, something that is always a primary concern in a heavily indebted economy. When
liquidity declines, it becomes harder for weak companies to refinance. Some default. Credit spreads
widen. Investors worry and look for lower-risk assets — paradigmatically, those very same
Treasuries the Fed is selling.

This increased demand drives Treasury prices up and yields down, the opposite of what the
standard theory would suggest. As Howell puts it, “Yes, when [the Fed] is actively buying or selling,
that pushes yield down or up, but when you look at the longer term, the liquidity effect is
dominant.”
This seems paradoxical: Fed creates demand for Treasuries by selling them. But the crucial point is
that when the Fed sells a Treasury, it literally destroys the money it takes in, reducing system
liquidity.
Is the market pricing in the possibility that quantitative tightening might push yields down?

One goods (and services) read
At risk of repeating a cliché, the pandemic packed a decade’s worth of change into a few months.
No, really, look:

Between February and May 2020, the ratio of goods to services bought by US consumers wiped out
more than a decade of declines. This has been pointed out many times, and for good reason: the
huge shift of demand to goods is very inflationary.

We are finally seeing some clear signs of normalisation. December data came out last week
showing consumers moving back from goods to services — and suggesting a similar move in
November was not a blip. In durable goods, a big pandemic anomaly (think Peloton), the reversion
was especially sharp. The chart below shows what fraction of consumer goods bought were durable
goods:

There is chatter that more normal demand for goods is a bellwether of lower inflation, a case our
colleague Martin Sandbu has forcefully made. We don’t know. All we’d point out is that coupled
with the now-fully normalised personal savings rate, two of the biggest economic dislocations of
the pandemic are fading. That surely means something for markets. Readers are invited to send
their prognoses our way. (Ethan Wu)

One good read
A hacker known as P4x was himself the victim of an attempted hack by the North Korean
government. He did not like this. So he shut down the country’s internet.

Recommended newsletters for you
Due Diligence — Top stories from the world of corporate finance. Sign up here

Swamp Notes — Expert insight on the intersection of money and power in US politics. Sign up
here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Robert Armstrong
Unhedged
Covid-19
US quantitative easing
Markets

