FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Unhedged

Inflation is bad, but not worse
And central bank forward guidance is kind of lame

ROBERT ARMSTRONG

© Financial Times

Robert Armstrong and Ethan Wu
Published NOV 11 2021

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
This article is an on-site version of our Unhedged newsletter. Sign up here to get the newsletter
sent straight to your inbox every weekday

Good morning. Stocks have fallen two days in a row. It’s a correction! Or something! Whatever it is,
we’re back to talking about inflation. Email us with your thoughts: robert.armstrong@ft.com or
ethan.wu@ft.com.

Prices and politics
October inflation in the US came in hot. For now, this is probably a bigger deal politically than
economically, but the politics will matter to markets.
The important number from Wednesday’s consumer price index report is inflation ex-food and
energy, which rose 4.6 per cent. This tells us core inflation is about as hot as it has been since June:

The July and August reports were a bit of a head fake. They made us think inflation was cooling. It
is not. But it’s not really getting worse, either. Because October’s 4.6 per cent is 10 basis points
higher than June’s 4.5 per cent, we can have headlines about a 30-year high in inflation again, but
core inflation is roughly 4-4.5 per cent, and that’s where it’s been. Don’t freak out.
We have strong demand, fuelled by government stimulus, and supply bottlenecks which are
causing price spikes, especially of goods. Some people think when those bottlenecks go away, and
things will go back to normal. Other people disagree. Unhedged has no idea which side is right, but
in any case is not convinced we got very much in the way of new information in yesterday’s report.

The best case for freaking out is based on the housing component of CPI, which is stable, sticky and
big (a third of the index or so). It rose by 3.5 per cent, and the trend looks like this:

Part of the issue here is that houses are assets, not goods, and we are in something that looks an
awful lot like an asset bubble. If you strip out owners’ equivalent rent (which reflects house prices),
the picture is less bad. Plain old rent inflation is still below pre-pandemic levels:

If house prices keep going crazy, rent will eventually follow, but we are not there yet.

So we are where we were: waiting to see what happens when the bottlenecks clear (including the
labour bottlenecks, which show up in things such as food away from home prices). Federal Open
Market Committee members who were dovish before are unlikely to be suddenly more hawkish
now. Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell has stated plainly he thinks “transitory” is compatible with
inflation that doesn’t start to normalise until the second half of 2022. Team transitory can still say,
“We should keep monetary and fiscal policy loose, prices will cool, higher wages will stick, and
there will soon be happiness all across the land.”
But for now there is not happiness all across the land, because fuel prices are high and real wages
are stagnant at best. Nominal wage growth minus inflation including food and energy (a volatile
series that is not predictive, but which reflects the world people live in) looks like this:

Vulgar language is warranted here. Objectively, this sucks. If team transitory is right, the trend will
reverse, perhaps dramatically, and the journey will have been worth it. But the economic debate
about what kind of inflation we are seeing cannot obscure the reality — and the political reality —
of that chart. Here’s a tweet from Joe Manchin, the swing vote Democrat in the Senate:

“By all accounts, the threat posed by record inflation to the American people
is not ‘transitory’ and is instead getting worse. From the grocery store to the
gas pump, Americans know the inflation tax is real and DC can no longer
ignore the economic pain Americans feel every day.”
This is factually false. Inflation is not getting worse by all accounts. But it is accurate emotionally.
It’s time to think about the market implications if President Joe Biden’s agenda is dead in the
water.

Forward guidance cannot deliver on its promises
When a central bank surprises the market, the C-word starts to fly. “The Bank blinked on rates and
now its credibility is on the line,” read one headline after the Bank of England held UK interest
rates steady last week.
Barclays’ Moyeen Islam, writing in the FT on Monday, suggested the BoE might protect its
credibility by adopting something like the Federal Reserve’s dot plot — a chart of the monetary
committee’s expectations for future policy rates. The idea is this: if central banks say they are going
to do something, and then do it, markets will believe them the next time they talk. This lets
policymakers affect rates with talk alone — and potentially affect rates all along the yield curve, not
just at the short end.
But credibility can only be a byproduct of good policy. Whatever yesterday’s guidance was, things
change, and the important thing is doing the right thing today. Here’s how the former Fed
economist Claudia Sahm put it to me:

“At the end of the day, credibility rests on making the right decision . . .
Frankly, the Bank of England to some extent could have been blindsided by
the data. Again, at the end of the day, you should do the policy you think is
the best policy. If the world gives you the opportunity to be able to signal it,
this is even better.”

Our colleague Martin Wolf makes the same point, in an email:

“The sensible way of thinking about this is that the central bank will actually
do what it thinks sensible at the time, given its targets. Unless it is stupid, it
will not do what is now obviously the wrong thing to do even if it has
indicated before that it might do something else that it then thought was the
right thing to do.”
There are two things a central bank really needs. A policy framework that is not only wise but clear
enough that the market can roughly anticipate the actions it will dictate; and unified, consistent
and persistent communication of that framework.
The US central bank has been exceptionally good at communicating its intentions lately. As a
result, we seem to be tapering without a taper tantrum. This is good, and a welcome contrast with
the BoE. But the Fed’s policy framework is a bit of a mess. Its average inflation targeting
framework is vague. As Sahm put it: “They can’t even agree on what an average is.” This might
cause trouble before long, dots or no dots.
Forward guidance might be useful as an internal reference tool. A dot plot might give individual
monetary committee members a bit of autonomy, which might make them behave more
responsibly. And guidance might, under certain fortunate circumstances, give central banks a bit of
power to jawbone the yield curve. But it can only be a weak tool.
There will always be dissonance between central bank decisions and market expectations. Below is
a chart of one-year London interbank offered rate, in blue, plotted against what one-year-hence
expectations for that rate had been a year before, in orange (thanks to Edward Al-Hussainy for
suggesting the chart). The two are proxies for what traders thought Fed policy would be, and what
it turned out to be. Unsurprisingly, the dot plot’s introduction in 2012 did not stop people from
putting bad bets on Fed behaviour:

Dots, schmots. Hedge funds are gonna hedge fund. (Ethan Wu)

One good read
Aswath Damodaran on Tesla’s valuation. He is very optimistic about the company’s future, and still
thinks the stock is wildly overpriced.

Recommended newsletters for you
FT Asset Management — The inside story on the movers and shakers behind a multitrilliondollar industry. Sign up here
Free Lunch — Your guide to the global economic policy debate. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Robert Armstrong
Unhedged
Bonds

US inflation
Markets

