FT PROFESSIONAL

Transport

UK government considers linking rail fare rises to lower rate of inflation
Chancellor has been pushing cabinet ministers to find ways to reduce financial pressure on households
ahead of Budget

Rail industry figures said Reeves and her Treasury team have taken a direct interest in the next set of fare rises © Neil Hall/EPA

Jim Pickard, Sam Fleming, Rachel Millard and Peter Campbell
Published NOV 14 2025

Ministers are debating whether to link rail fare increases to a lower rate of inflation as the
government tries to bear down on price growth, according to people familiar with the discussions.
The Department for Transport is considering a switch to the Consumer Price Index to calculate
how much rail fares rise each year in England rather than the Retail Price Index, which tends to
run at a faster pace, the people said.

The discussions come as chancellor Rachel Reeves tries to clamp down on the cost of living in a
Budget that is expected to contain cuts to VAT on energy bills and potentially also to levies that
fund energy efficiency programmes.
Reeves has been pushing cabinet ministers to find ways to reduce the financial pressure on
households and create more space for the Bank of England to cut interest rates by bringing down
inflation.
Rail industry figures said Reeves and her Treasury team have taken a direct interest in the next set
of fare rises, which are typically announced in late December to take effect in March. The process is
usually overseen by DfT officials.
The Office for Budget Responsibility’s forecasts for interest rates are a key element of its
predictions for future government interest costs and therefore borrowing.
This means Reeves could have more room for manoeuvre at the Budget if the fiscal watchdog
expects lower inflation and interest rates.
The government is already moving to link key subsidies for renewable energy to the lower rate of
inflation measured by CPI.
Last month it launched a consultation on linking payments to renewable power station owners
under a legacy subsidy programme known as the renewables obligation (RO) scheme to CPI, rather
than RPI as currently.
The UK has been gradually moving away from the use of the RPI, which is published by the Office
for National Statistics but not badged as an official statistic. A range of prices are still linked to the
index, however, including rail fares, student tuition fees, and a range of government duties.
The RPI uses a different formula to the CPI and has different components, which mean that it has
run around 1 percentage point higher on average over the long term.
Rail ticket price increases each year are typically the rate of inflation plus 1 percentage point and
are set using July’s figures. RPI in July was 4.8 per cent, while CPI was 3.8 per cent.

“In this world of high inflation expectations, getting the numbers down over six to nine months is
really important for the optics and in helping open the door for more Bank of England rate cuts,”
said Victoria Clarke, UK chief economist at Santander.
One former Treasury mandarin said that the Treasury “has been trying to get the [transport]
department to shift to CPI for literally years”.
A DfT spokesperson said no decisions had been made on rail fares “and we won’t pre-empt the
Budget”.
Officials said the government has made fares and ticketing reform a key priority within its wider
rail nationalisation programme, but that it is too soon to predict what next year’s fare increase will
be.
One suggested reform involves reducing the number of types of tickets that passengers can buy. In
a consultation published last month, officials said ticket simplification, if implemented in April
2026, would save consumers around £80mn in the financial year.

The Bank of England has pointed to changes in regulated prices in areas such as energy and water
as part of the reason for the recent upsurge in inflation to 3.8 per cent — nearly twice the official
target.
In its latest rate-setting meeting the BoE opted to leave rates unchanged, but governor Andrew
Bailey left the door open to a reduction in rates as soon as December.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Transport
UK inflation
Bank of England
Office for National Statistics UK
Office for Budget Responsibility

