FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Free Lunch

Are US and euro inflation pressures parting ways?
US prices are from Mars and the Eurozone’s are from Venus — or maybe not

MARTIN SANDBU

There is a seeming divergence between the latest inflation data in the US and Eurozone and also differing accounts of what has
driven price rises © Angel Garcia/Bloomberg

Martin Sandbu
Published MAY 9 2024

This article is an on-site version of Martin Sandbu’s Free Lunch newsletter. Premium subscribers
can sign up here to get the newsletter delivered every Thursday. Standard subscribers can
upgrade to Premium here, or explore all FT newsletters

Americans are from Mars and Europeans from Venus, was the quip supposed to capture the two
power centres’ approach to geopolitics. It could now be repurposed for another analytical
shorthand. It looks likely that the Federal Reserve will keep interest rates higher for longer than
everyone expected until recently, while European central banks will get on with loosening
monetary policy. The reason is a seeming divergence between the latest inflation data but also
differing accounts of what has driven price rises. So is US inflation from Mars and euro inflation
from Venus? Like with the original geopolitical version, the shorthand is more cute than correct.
The reality is complicated.
There is a widespread view that the US and Europe (by which I refer here to the countries using the
euro) have had inflation experiences that diverge in ways requiring different policy responses. In
particular, there is a tendency to blame US inflation on domestic fiscal policy excesses, while
putting the Eurozone in the “unlucky negative energy shock” box. The implication is, to simplify
only a little, that the US is doomed to live with higher-for-longer rates and some difficult fiscal
choices, while the Eurozone is just damned whatever it does.
You need go no further than the IMF for support of the “different inflation drivers” story. As my
colleague Martin Wolf set out in his column a few weeks ago, the fund’s World Economic Outlook
attributed much of the US inflation rise to overheating labour markets, but none in the Eurozone.
Below I, er, steal Martin’s chart, which itself reproduces the WEO’s:

The decomposition of the surge in inflation looks very different in the US
and the Eurozone
Decomposition of inflation drivers (% point deviation from Dec 2019 in annualised three-month
average inflation)
Headline inflation (line)
Headline inflation shocks
Longer-term expectations
Labour market tightness
US
8

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8
Eurozone
12

10

8

Pass-through effects
Residual

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

Apr 2020 Sep 2020 Feb 2021 Jul 2021 Dec 2021 May 2022 Oct 2022 Mar 2023 Aug 2023 Jan 2024
Source: IM

According to the IMF, virtually all the US upward price pressures since inflation peaked come from
a labour market that is “too” strong (the pink bars). In the Eurozone, it’s entirely a story of outside
shocks and their propagation (shades of blue).
A simpler and more recent contrast that is often noted is between the behaviours of the standard
gauges of inflation on the two sides of the Atlantic so far this year. On a month-to-month basis,
inflation dynamics have moved the wrong way in the US recently, with prices now rising faster this
year than over the past six or 12 months taken as a whole. It is this pick-up in US inflation
measures that has pushed out previously expected Federal Reserve rate cuts beyond the immediate
horizon. The European Central Bank, meanwhile, is sticking to plans for a June cut, with the
justification that its targeted inflation rate remains quiescent — see the chart below. (Elsewhere in
Europe, a loosening cycle is already under way. The Riksbank gave Swedish borrowers their first
rate reduction this week.)

So far, so conventional. But as inflation nerds know, different countries use different inflation
measures. If we want to compare like with like we need to use identical indicators. So take a look
below, where I have charted the harmonised index of consumer prices, not seasonally adjusted, for
both the US and the Eurozone. It’s the one normally reported for all Eurozone countries, and it
happens to be available for the US as well. Moreover, it excludes a measure of housing costs that
has recently been confounding observations of US price dynamics. (Here is the US Bureau of Labor
Statistics’ page about how it produces the US HICP for international comparison purposes and how
it differs from its homegrown indicators.)

If you see the same as I do, this like-for-like measure of inflation has behaved remarkably similarly
in the latest episode, with just a slightly later onset of the rise in Europe compared with the US.
Most importantly, the most recent inflation experience shows a clear pick-up in both economies.
This similarity could mean one of two things. Either US inflation dynamics are more benign than
the other measures would seem to suggest and the Fed should be as willing to cut as the ECB. Or
Eurozone ones should worry the ECB more than they do. I tend towards the first answer, since
once you use the seasonally adjusted Eurozone numbers, disinflation seems to be going just fine.
(In other words, the pick-up after January in the non-adjusted measure is just a recurring annual
pattern.) I would feel even firmer in that belief if a seasonally adjusted version of US HICP showed
the same as the Eurozone numbers. But I haven’t been able to find such version (Free Lunch
readers, let me know if you have). Eyeballing the unadjusted US and Eurozone HICP over time,
though, does seem to show similar annual fluctuations. So it’s a good guess seasonal adjustment
would remove the recent US uptick.

But that doesn’t need to unsettle the bigger story of differential drivers of post-Covid inflation. Or
does it? When I first saw the chart I reproduced at the start of this piece, what struck me was how a
very similar chart had told a very different story. In February, Chris Giles devoted his excellent
central banking newsletter to another project of decomposing the contributions to inflation since
Covid-19. That included this wonderful chart:

The drivers of post-Covid inflation
Annualised quarterly CPI inflation (%)
Actual
Initial conditions
Productivity
US

High vacancies

Eurozone

Shortages

Energy prices

UK

Food prices

Japan

15

1

10

1

5

5

Inflation target

Inflation target

Inflation target

Inflation target

0

-5
2019

0

2021

2023 2019

2021

2023 2019

2021

2023 2019

2021

2023

-

Source: CEPR • For simplicity, some components of inflation have been excluded so the bars will no
always sum to the actual value

What I would like you to focus on are the dark blue bars, which denote the contribution to price
pressures from overheating labour markets. Compare the US and the Eurozone in this chart, then
look back at the chart at the top of this piece. You got it: they tell completely different stories about
the causes of inflation in the US in terms of how much labour markets drove up wages and prices.

The chart from Chris reproduces the findings of a project (see chapter 16 in the linked book) to
extend to many countries the Bernanke-Blanchard analysis of US inflation that we covered in Free
Lunch last year. Across the board, they found that: “The decompositions yield one main and
common conclusion: most of the quarter-to-quarter movements in inflation have been due to price
shocks, not to pressure from the labour market.” Mars and Venus turn out to be very similar
planets.
What are we to conclude from this? Obviously, that there is less consensus than it might seem on
the nature of the great global inflation and disinflation of the past three years. That in itself is
worrying and should make policymakers even more aware of the uncertainty clouding their
decisions.
Beyond that, can we establish who is more likely to be right, the “divergers” or the “convergers”? I
certainly cannot as it would take a lot more fine-grained economic analysis than I can do here. And
it could be that it’s impossible if (as Chris suggested in his piece) what the models produce is so
sensitive to what assumptions you put in that even understanding why they differ leaves us none
the wiser. I will, however, share one reason why I would put my money on the “converger” result of
the Bernanke-Blanchard method for now. The IMF methodology (details here) seems to have used
a different measure of labour market tightness for the Eurozone (where it used unemployment
compared with trend) and the US (where it used vacancy rates). Bernanke-Blanchard used a
consistent measure everywhere (vacancy rates). That alone makes me trust the latter more. But it
also adds to the confusion, as you would have expected the US findings to be more similar between
the two studies and not the Eurozone ones as is the case.
Finally, how would it matter if the “convergers” are right and the “divergers” wrong? Well, it would
mean that diverging central bank policy means someone is making a mistake, which will cause
trouble even if we don’t know who is making it. But I think it would mean something else, too. For
the “convergers” converge on a result that labour market overheating played a negligible role
everywhere. In which case, inflation was everywhere largely the result of an unavoidable global
commodity price shock, with only minor local variations. And that makes me, at least, lean further
towards the view I offered a while back, that there was never very much central banks could do
about this inflationary episode — and that we err in blaming them for failing.

Other readables
The performance of the US economy has been a triumph, writes Martin Wolf, so why is President
Joe Biden not benefiting from it politically?
Chris Giles interviews Arthur Laffer of the Laffer curve. Come for the central bank bashing, stay for
what he said to Donald Trump.
Surveillance capitalism, the pregnancy edition.
Emma Jacobs investigates the closure of one of Brick Lane’s oldest beigel (yes, beigel) shops.

Recommended newsletters for you
Chris Giles on Central Banks — Your essential guide to money, interest rates, inflation and what
central banks are thinking. Sign up here
Trade Secrets — A must-read on the changing face of international trade and globalisation.
Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Martin Sandbu
Free Lunch
Eurozone inflation
Global inflation
US inflation

