FT PROFESSIONAL

FirstFT World

FirstFT: US economy surprises
Also in today’s newsletter, UK engineering group compared to a ‘burning platform’ and Intel slashes forecasts

The US economy expanded by 2.9 per cent on an annualised basis in the final quarter of 2022

Gordon Smith, Tee Zhuo and Emily Goldberg
Published JAN 26 2023 | Updated JAN 27 2023, 06:17

Good morning. This article is an on-site version of our FirstFT newsletter. Sign up to our Asia,
Europe/Africa or Americas edition to get it sent straight to your inbox every weekday morning

US equity markets closed higher yesterday after data showed the country’s economy grew faster
than expected in the final quarter of last year.
The world’s largest economy expanded 2.9 per cent on an annualised basis between September and
December, according to figures published by the commerce department.

That marked a slowdown from growth of 3.2 per cent in the third quarter but was stronger than a
consensus forecast of 2.6 per cent. The data highlight the delicate balancing act the Federal
Reserve is facing to reduce inflation to its 2 per cent target while avoiding a recession.

US economy registers slower, but still solid, growth
Per cent change in GDP from previous quarter, seasonally adjusted at annualised rates, for each
quarter since 2019 Q1
40

20

0

-20

2019 Q1

2020 Q1

2021 Q1

2022 Q1

Source: US Bureau of Economic Analysis
FT Graphic: Caitlin Gilbert

Later today the Fed’s preferred measure of inflation will be published. The personal consumption
index is forecast to have declined by 0.1 per cent after increasing 0.1 per cent the previous month,
further evidence that US inflation has peaked.

The growth number and the inflation data come ahead of the Fed’s latest interest rate-setting
meeting, which wraps up next Wednesday.
Having moved aggressively since March to tighten monetary policy, with rises of 0.75 basis points
in the federal funds rate, the US central bank is expected to slow the pace of rate increases at the
first meeting of the year.
A quarter-point rate rise next week would lift the main policy rate to a new target range of between
4.50 per cent and 4.75 per cent, still shy of the 5.1 per cent level that most officials believe will be
necessary to get inflation fully under control.

Five more stories in the news
1. Rolls-Royce’s new chief warns company is a ‘burning platform’ The new chief
executive of one of Britain’s flagship engineering companies has likened the company to a “burning
platform”. In a brutal assessment of Rolls-Royce’s prospects, Tufan Erginbilgic told staff that if the
company does not change, it will not survive. “Every investment we make, we destroy value,” he
told employees. “We underperform every key competitor out there.”
2. Adani sell-off hits $42bn after short seller targets group A sell-off of Adani Group
shares deepened today, taking losses this week to more than $42bn since a US-based short seller
targeted the Indian conglomerate headed by one of the world’s richest men. Hindenburg Research
accused Adani Group of engaging in stock price manipulation and accounting fraud for decades.
Adani Group has denied the allegations, calling them “a malicious combination of selective
misinformation and stale, baseless and discredited”.
3. Emerging markets see near-record investment Investors are pouring $1.1bn a day into
emerging equity and debt markets, as falling inflation and the reopening of China’s sprawling
economy help reverse last year’s slide. The speed of cross-border flows is now second only to the
surge that followed the lifting of coronavirus lockdowns in late 2020 and early 2021, surpassing
previous peaks over the past two decades.

4. US extends stay of Hongkongers at risk of Chinese repression Joe Biden has extended
a programme that allows Hong Kong citizens facing potential political repression from China to
remain in the US for two more years, following pressure from progressive lawmakers and human
rights groups. The programme would have expired on February 5.
5. Intel takes axe to financial guidance The chipmaker said it expected revenue in the current
quarter to fall to between $10.5bn and $11.5bn. The midpoint is nearly $3bn below analysts’
expectations, implying a 40 per cent tumble from the year before. The sombre forecast was made
as Intel revealed revenue fell by a third in the final quarter of 2022. Its shares fell nearly 10 per
cent in after-market trading last night.
How well did you keep up with the news this week? Take our quiz.

The day ahead
Corporate results US oil major Chevron kicks off Big Oil’s earnings season. American Express,
Charles Schwab and Colgate-Palmolive also report results this morning.

Economic data Economists expect the University of Michigan’s final January consumer
sentiment reading to hold steady at 64.6, securing back-to-back monthly gains for the gauge.
International Holocaust Remembrance Day The world remembers the millions of Jews and
other minorities murdered by Nazi Germany. ECB president Christine Lagarde is due to speak at
an unveiling of a new memorial plaque in Frankfurt. (European Central Bank)

What else we’re reading
How Olaf Scholz made Joe Biden shift on tanks The planned deliveries of US-made M1
Abrams tanks and German-made Leopards were met with jubilation in Kyiv and relief in western
capitals. But the breakthrough involved tense negotiations that tested the strength of US-German
relations.
The Fed finds itself in a nasty hole There is never a good moment for the US government to
hit its ceiling for debt issuance. Now, however, is a particularly inopportune time for this fight,
writes Gillian Tett, as big foreign buyers quietly trim their Treasury holdings and underlying
vulnerabilities in the US government debt market persist.
How London’s property market became an inheritocracy Life has rarely been so hard for
a first-time buyer in London as it is today. Prices have shot up as real wages have stuttered, new
home supply has not kept pace with demand and mortgage lending regulations have tightened.
Without a leg up from parents, first-time buyers on average earnings have been forced to abandon
dreams of home ownership.

Is a South American common currency a good idea? Economists have questioned Brazil
and Argentina’s plan to create a common currency, with former IMF chief economist Olivier
Blanchard calling it “insane”. But political analysts have been less dismissive, pointing out that the
desires of South America’s mainly leftwing presidents to promote regional integration and
challenge the US dollar’s dominance should not be underestimated.
South Africa’s support underscores Moscow’s propaganda success Fears of Russian
influence in Africa often centre on what the west views as the Kremlin’s attempts to destabilise
fragile countries such as Mali and Burkina Faso. But South Africa’s shifting position on the war in
Ukraine reveals Moscow’s success in stoking doubt about responsibility for the conflict and how a
friendly government can help spread its message.

China’s singles fight pressure to marry Young Chinese have for decades invented creative
tactics to allay parental demands for marriage and grandchildren, put off by the exorbitant costs of
modern child-rearing while juggling taxing jobs and sky-high property prices in large cities. But the
fight is moving from the home into the political arena as the world’s most populous country enters
a long-term and irreversible population decline.

Take a break from the news
Decades after his murder, the tooth of Patrice Lumumba — anti-colonial hero, pan-African
nationalist and the first democratically elected Congolese prime minister — turned up in Belgium.
This is the story of its return to the Democratic Republic of Congo.

A gold-capped molar belonging to the late Congolese leader Patrice Lumumba turned up in Belgium decades after his murder. ©
Jelle Vermeersch

Thank you for reading and remember you can add FirstFT to myFT. You can also elect to receive
a FirstFT push notification every morning on the app. Send your recommendations and
feedback to firstft@ft.com

Recommended newsletters for you
Asset Management — Find out the inside story on the movers and shakers behind a
multitrillion dollar industry. Sign up here
The Week Ahead — Start every week with a preview of what’s on the agenda. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
World
Companies
FirstFT
Gordon Smith

