FT PROFESSIONAL

Federal Reserve

Federal Reserve reappoints regional chiefs in move that allays fears of challenge by
Trump allies
Decision eases concerns that central bankers aligned with the US president would block them remaining in
their roles

The regional Fed presidents have been the most hawkish voices on the rate-setting Federal Open Market Committee © AFP/Getty
Images

Claire Jones in Washington
Published DEC 11 2025

The Federal Reserve has reappointed its regional bosses earlier than anticipated, allaying concerns
that Donald Trump’s allies on the central bank’s board could have sought to block them remaining
in their roles.
The Fed’s board said on Thursday it had backed a decision to reappoint the 11 regional presidents
who intend to remain in their roles. The vote, which occurs every five years, was scheduled to take
place before the end of February.

While the process has rarely attracted much attention in the past, the president’s hostility towards
the Fed had raised concerns that some of the heads of the 12 regional banks that make up its
regional network could see their terms blocked.
The regional Fed presidents have been the most hawkish voices on the rate-setting Federal Open
Market Committee, warning of the dangers of rising inflation amid calls from Trump and his
economic advisers for the central bank to engage in aggressive cuts to borrowing costs.
Two of them — Chicago Fed head Austan Goolsbee and his Kansas City counterpart Jeffrey Schmid
— dissented from Wednesday’s decision to cut US borrowing costs by a quarter point to between
3.5 and 3.75 per cent.
Another four signalled their displeasure with the decision through so-called dot plots of projections
that indicated they thought borrowing costs should have remained at the range between 3.75 and 4
per cent set in October.
Two of those four were likely to have been Cleveland Fed head Beth Hammack and Dallas Fed
president Lorie Logan — both of whom will have a vote on monetary policy from January, analysts
said.
US Treasury secretary Scott Bessent, who has been running the process to appoint the next Fed
chair, has been among the most vocal critics of the power held by the regional presidents.
Earlier this week, Bessent signalled the administration would try to force through a change that
would require all new regional Fed presidents to live in the district they served for three years
before they took on the role.
While all 12 participate in FOMC meetings and deliver their own quarterly dot-plot forecasts of
what happens next to interest rates, only the New York chief has a permanent vote on the panel. Of
the remaining 11, four receive voting seats that change each year.
The seven members of the Fed’s board of governors also vote at each meeting.

The vote to reappoint the regional Fed heads received unanimous support from the board of
governors, which includes Trump ally Stephen Miran, along with Christopher Waller and Michelle
Bowman, both of whom were appointed during Trump’s first term.
Unlike governors, regional Fed heads do not require a presidential nomination followed by Senate
approval. The process of appointing them is handled by the board of directors of each regional Fed.
The previous vote to reappoint the regional Fed presidents and their deputies took place in January
2021 — though earlier reappointments have happened in the year before a decision needed to be
finalised.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
US economy
US politics & policy
US interest rates
Federal Reserve

