FT PROFESSIONAL

Markets Briefing Markets

Treasury yields and dollar rise after Jay Powell warns on inflation
Choppy session for stock markets after Fed chair says interest rates must stay at current level or even
increase

The Jackson Hole conference comes at a time of heightened market anxiety over the future of global interest rates © Financial Times

Jaren Kerr in New York and Daria Mosolova in London
Published AUG 25 2023 | Updated AUG 25 2023, 16:21

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
US Treasury yields and the dollar rose after Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell said the central bank
would consider another interest rate rise, and that it intends to hold policy at a restrictive level to
temper inflation.

Powell, addressing the Fed’s economic conference in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, on Friday reiterated
that US inflation “remains too high” and it necessitates the central bank either holding rates at
their current level or raising them to bring inflation down to its 2 per cent target.
Traders still expect the Fed at its September meeting to hold rates steady at a 22-year high, but
futures markets on Friday pushed their expectations for a cut in the federal funds rate to June
2024, a month later than they expected at the start of the week.
The sell-off in US government bonds, which took yields on long-term debt to a 16-year high at the
start of this week, continued. The yield on the two-year US Treasury rose 0.06 percentage points to
5.07 per cent while that on the benchmark 10-year note was steady at 4.23 per cent. Bond yields
rise as prices fall.
Wall Street’s benchmark S&P 500 finished a choppy session 0.7 per cent higher, and advanced 0.8
per cent for the week. The tech-focused Nasdaq Composite climbed 0.9 per cent, and rose 2.3 per
cent over the week. The gains across five sessions ended a three-week losing streak for both
indices.
The dollar, which tends to rise when investors anticipate higher rates, gained 0.2 per cent against a
basket of currencies after Powell’s remarks to close at its highest level since May 31.
“[Powell] has been very consistent that they are targeting inflation getting down into the 2s — and
eventually all the way to 2 per cent,” said Wylie Tollette, chief investment officer of Franklin
Templeton Investment Solutions. “He’s been very clear on that and clear that we’re not there yet.”

Until recently, the majority of market participants believed that the Fed had finished raising its
benchmark federal funds rate, which is currently in a range of 5.25-5.5 per cent, but recent
economic data has signalled that the labour market remains tight, and that consumer spending is
still relatively healthy.
Vishal Khanduja, co-head of broad markets fixed income at Morgan Stanley Investment
Management, said the resilient economic data would likely begin to falter as consumers and
employers feel the pressure of persistently high borrowing costs.
“The consumer is definitely starting to hurt,” he said. “Certain cohorts of consumers that we track
are already going back to pre-Covid levels of delinquencies.” These had slowed down during the
pandemic due to government stimulus and increased savings rates.
“In the next six months in the US economy, I think you will start seeing data surprise to the
downside,” Khanduja said.

In Europe, the region-wide Stoxx Europe 600 index, which had earlier advanced as strong
commodity prices lifted energy and utility stocks, ended the day fractionally lower.
Brent crude, the international benchmark, settled 1.3 per cent higher to trade at $84.48 a barrel,
while US equivalent West Texas Intermediate added 1 per cent to trade at $79.83 a barrel.
The jump came as oil prices were heading for a second consecutive week of declines, as concerns
over China’s economic outlook and increasing interest rates raised concerns over future demand
for the fossil fuel.
In Asia, Hong Kong’s Hang Seng index fell 1.4 per cent, while China’s CSI 300 lost 0.4 per cent and
Japan’s Topix shed 0.9 per cent.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Currencies
Bonds
Commodities
Equities
Markets

