FT PROFESSIONAL

Federal Reserve

Jay Powell warns that taming US inflation will cause ‘some pain’
Risk of triggering recession may depend on factors outside Federal Reserve’s control, warns chair

‘The question whether we can execute a soft landing or not, it may actually depend on factors that we don’t control,’ Powell said on
Thursday © Jonathan Ernst/Pool/AFP/Getty

Colby Smith in Washington
Published MAY 12 2022 | Updated MAY 12 2022, 18:06

Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell has warned bringing inflation down to the US central bank’s
target of 2 per cent will cause “some pain”, adding that tackling high prices without causing a
recession may depend on factors outside of its control.
The remarks from Powell, which constitute some of his most bearish comments to date, come amid
significant uncertainty about the economic outlook as the Fed begins what is likely to be the fastest
tightening of monetary policy in years.

The central bank has raised rates by 0.75 percentage points from the near-zero levels that had been
in place since the early days of the coronavirus pandemic, having implemented a half-point rate
rise just last week.
The moves are part of its plans to “expeditiously” shift policy to a neutral setting that no longer
stimulates demand. The central bank will also begin shrinking its $9tn balance sheet next month.
In an interview with Marketplace on Thursday, Powell reiterated the Fed’s commitment to bringing
down inflation and underscored the challenge of doing so without triggering job losses and a
possible recession.
“The process of getting inflation down to 2 per cent will also include some pain, but ultimately the
most painful thing would be if we were to fail to deal with it and inflation were to get entrenched in
the economy at high levels,” he said.
“The question whether we can execute a soft landing or not, it may actually depend on factors that
we don’t control,” Powell added. “But we should control the controllable . . . there’s a job to do on
demand.”
The Fed is expected to introduce at least two more half-point rate rises in June and July, and to
maintain that pace at its meeting in September. After that point, it is expected to moderate back to
quarter-point increases. By the end of the year, traders estimate the benchmark policy rate will rise
to about 2.7 per cent.
Powell sought to clarify the Fed’s willingness to raise rates by 0.75 percentage points at some point,
having said last week during a press conference that the central bank is “not actively considering”
that.
“If things come in better than we expect, then we’re prepared to do less,” he said. “If they come in
worse than when we expect, then we’re prepared to do more.”
Powell’s comments were published just hours after the US Senate voted overwhelmingly in favour
to confirm him for a second term as chair, capping off a series of historic votes that have reshaped
the top tier of the central bank.

Powell — who was elevated to Fed chair by Donald Trump in 2017 after serving as a governor from
2012, and once worked as a top Treasury official under George HW Bush — received 80 votes in
support, while 19 senators voted against him.
Lisa Cook, a professor of economics and international relations at Michigan State University, and
Philip Jefferson, a professor of economics at Davidson College, were also confirmed by the Senate
this week to fill two vacancies on the Board of Governors.
Powell on Thursday also defended the Fed’s actions to date, but acknowledged an earlier start
would have been more appropriate.
“It probably would have been better for us to have raised rates a little sooner,” he said. “I’m not
sure how much difference it would have made, but we have to make decisions in real time, based
on what we know then, and we did the best we could.”

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US economy
US politics & policy
Central banks
Federal Reserve
Jerome H. Powell

