FT PROFESSIONAL

US inflation

US inflation reached 7.9% in February hitting new 40-year high
CPI jumped ahead of oil spike adding pressure on Fed to tighten monetary policy

Economists fear that a prolonged crisis could dent growth © Bloomberg

Colby Smith and Kate Duguid in New York
Published MAR 10 2022 | Updated MAR 10 2022, 08:45

US consumer price growth approached 8 per cent last month ahead of a surge in energy prices
following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, raising pressure on the Federal Reserve to more
substantively tighten monetary policy.
The consumer price index increased another 0.8 per cent between January and February, following
a 0.6 per cent monthly increase in the previous period, the Bureau of Labor Statistics said on
Thursday. Prices were fuelled by higher energy, food and shelter costs.

From a year ago, prices are up 7.9 per cent, the fastest annual increase since January 1982. Once
highly volatile items like food and energy were stripped out, “core” CPI jumped 6.4 per cent over
that period, or 0.5 per cent on a month-to-month basis.
The latest report captures the period just before Russia launched a full-scale attack on Ukraine and
western allies unveiled among the most punitive financial penalties ever levied on a country,
including a US ban on Russian energy imports.
The actions caused global energy markets to seize up, sending gas and oil prices rocketing. Prices
for wheat, nickel and other commodities also soared.
Even before the invasion, a 6.6 per cent jump in gasoline prices accounted for nearly a third of the
monthly CPI increase, according to the BLS. The broader energy index rose 3.5 per cent in
February, a substantial pick-up from the 0.9 per cent increase in January. Energy prices are now
roughly 25 per cent higher than the same period a year ago.
Food prices climbed by the most since April 2020, rising another 1 per cent month-on-month in
February as all six major grocery store food indices reported gains. The broader index is up nearly
8 per cent in the past 12 months.
More than 40 per cent of the monthly increase in core CPI stemmed from a 0.5 per cent jump in
shelter costs, the BLS said, with rent up another 0.6 per cent and hotel expenses up 2.2 per cent
after a decline in January.
Owners’ equivalent rent, a measure of what homeowners believe their properties would rent for,
rose 0.4 per cent for a 4.3 per cent annual increase. These gains partially offset a decline in used
car prices and some medical services.
The war in Ukraine is expected to push overall inflation even higher and delay the peak in the pace
of consumer price growth that was broadly expected later this year.
Economists fear that a prolonged crisis could not only dent growth, but also further entrench
inflationary pressures that have already begun to take root across a broad swath of the economy.

“The buzzword is stagflation,” said Alex Veroude, chief investment officer for North America at
Insight Investments, referring to a scenario of slowing growth and rising prices. Though he said it
is not yet clear if such an environment will emerge nor how the Fed will respond.
Market measures of inflation expectations have moved higher in recent days to reflect these
concerns, with the popular two-year break-even rate climbing above 4 per cent after the invasion.
A swap rate that measures what five-year inflation expectations will be in five years’ time has also
jumped, and at 2.7 per cent is well above the Fed’s 2 per cent core inflation target.
Geopolitical tensions are not expected to knock the Fed off course, with traders still pencilling in at
least six interest rate increases this year. However, the conflict may complicate the path forward for
policy after the first adjustment.
The Fed is set to proceed with a quarter-point interest rate this month, and will then seek to move
the federal funds rate closer to a level that neither aids nor constrains economic activity — also
known as neutral rate and estimated to be between 2 and 2.5 per cent.
Half-point interest rate increases, which have not been used in more than two decades, are firmly
on the table for one or more meetings, Powell said. He also acknowledged that it may be
appropriate to lift rates above neutral, increasing the risk of a recession.
Brian Smedley, chief economist at Guggenheim Partners, expects the Fed to proceed cautiously,
however, despite having to grapple with an “enormous commodity supply shock” that he says is
likely to further boost inflation.
“Given the big increase in uncertainty that markets are grappling with as well as businesses and
consumers, this eases the pressure on the Fed to do anything more than a 25 basis point hike,” he
said.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US inflation
US interest rates
Colby Smith
Kate Duguid

