FT PROFESSIONAL

US economy

US economy grew at 2.3% rate in fourth quarter
Figure comes after Fed chair Jay Powell said there was no hurry to cut interest rates

The economy was driven by the resilience of American consumers © Bloomberg

Claire Jones in Washington
Published JAN 30 2025 | Updated JAN 30 2025, 09:57

The US economy grew at an annualised rate of 2.3 per cent in the fourth quarter, a weaker than
expected end to a year dominated by the resilience of American consumers.
Thursday’s GDP figure from the Bureau of Economic Analysis compared with the 2.6 per cent
expected by economists polled by Bloomberg and 3.1 per cent in the third quarter.
The report comes a day after the Federal Reserve held interest rates, with chair Jay Powell saying
the strength of the economy meant the central bank did not need to be “in a hurry” to cut
borrowing costs.

Consumer spending powered a large portion of the growth in the world’s largest economy in the
fourth quarter, with government expenditures also boosting the figures, the BEA said. A decline in
investment partially offset the rise.
“It’s really important to see the acceleration in consumer spending, notably on big-ticket items —
vehicle sales went to their highest level since May 2021,” said Diane Swonk, chief economist at
KPMG US, who added that “a banner travel season” had contributed to services spending.
The US economy expanded 2.8 per cent for the whole of 2024, on a par with the 2.9 per cent
recorded in 2023.
Bernard Yaros, lead US economist at research firm Oxford Economics, said the slowdown in
growth in the fourth quarter was unlikely to last. “The weakness on the investment side was
attributable in large part to payback from an unsustainable boom in aircraft investment earlier [in
2024],” Yaros said.
The IMF expects the US economy to continue to outpace peers in Europe, Canada and Japan this
year. President Donald Trump’s pledge to cut taxes has raised expectations that US growth will
remain robust.
But some economists are concerned that if Trump sparks a trade war with tariffs on trading
partners, it could wipe out some of those expected gains.
“The biggest risk to our 2025 forecast is an immediate imposition of across-the-board tariffs on key
trading partners,” said Yaros, adding that a 25 per cent levy on Canada and Mexico, plus additional
tariffs on China, would dent growth by 1.2 percentage points.
US government bonds were broadly steady following the data, with the two-year yield 0.02
percentage points lower at 4.21 per cent, while the benchmark 10-year yield was down 0.04
percentage points at 4.52 per cent.
US stocks rose in early New York trading, with the S&P 500 gaining 0.5 per cent and the techheavy Nasdaq Composite also advancing 0.6 per cent.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
US economy
US GDP
Bureau of Economic Analysis US
Claire Jones

