FT PROFESSIONAL

US economy

Bill Gross warns Fed rate rises will ‘crack the US economy’
Former Pimco ‘bond king’ predicts central bank will be unable to go above 2.5% to 3%

Bill Gross, founder of investment house Pimco: “We’ve just gotten used to lower and lower rates and anything much higher will break
the housing market” © Emily Berl/New York Times/Redux/eyevine

Brooke Masters in New York
Published MAR 19 2022

Bill Gross, the influential investor, has warned that even though the Federal Reserve started raising
rates this week the US central bank will be unable to push through a planned series of further
increases because doing so would “crack the economy”.
The founder of investment house Pimco told the Financial Times this week he believes inflation is
approaching troubling levels but the US central bank will not be able to implement higher policy
rates to contain it.

“I suspect you can’t get above 2.5 to 3 per cent before you crack the economy again,” he said.
“We’ve just gotten used to lower and lower rates and anything much higher will break the housing
market.”
Gross’s concern stands in contrast to the central bank policymakers’ consensus and market
expectations of a 2.8 per cent policy rate by 2023 and to calls from St Louis Fed president James
Bullard to hit 3 per cent by the end of this year.
Dubbed “the bond king” for his decades of successful investing, Gross has been railing against low
policy rates for years.
“It destroys the savings function,” he said. “Meme stocks and NFTs [non fungible tokens], all of
this nonsense in my mind has developed from the inability to earn a decent return in your 401k”
retirement plan.
In the past 18 months, he has been putting his

It’s probably the best thing that
I left [Pimco]. At 72, you do start
to lose it
Bill Gross

personal money where his mouth is, by using options
to bet against GameStop and AMC, the most
prominent meme stocks to have seen their share
prices driven up by retail enthusiasts.
Although he initially took enough losses that he
stopped sleeping and closed some of his positions, he

says he has been vindicated by rapid tumbles in both company’s shares. “Maybe I’m an old fart . . .
but in total, I’m up maybe $15mn to $20mn.”
Gross has also profited handsomely from a decision to buy partnerships that invest in natural gas
pipelines. He freely admits his interest was piqued by their tax structure — dividends are
reinvested and not taxed until the holding is sold. Now the position is benefiting from sharply
higher energy prices owing to the emergence from the pandemic and the war in Ukraine.
Gross, 77, still wakes up early and spends five hours a day at his Bloomberg terminal. But he has
given up all thought of another comeback after his acrimonious forced departure from Pimco in
2014, a nasty 2018 divorce and a disastrous attempt to run a new fund for Janus Henderson.

Discomfort at the way he thought he would be portrayed in a new book recently led him to pen his
own memoir. “I wanted to set the record straight,” he said.
The process has forced him to recognise his own shortcomings and insecurities. In his last days at
Pimco, when he famously feuded with other top executives, “I was too sensitive and that was
disruptive,” he said. “It’s probably the best thing that I left. At 72, you do start to lose it, and at 77
you lose it even more.”
He attributed his poor investment run at Janus to taking too much risk in an effort to beat his old
firm, but also admitted, ruefully, that going solo forced him to recognise the value of his former
colleagues.
“I missed the Pimco investment committee” which met daily, he said. “This was a company of bond
kings and queens. I had some responsibility for hiring and keeping them at the firm. But these
people are good.”
He now believes that the flamboyant bond king image was not only a great marketing tool that
attracted clients but also allowed him to hide his anxiety and awkwardness. “People that want to be
famous basically want to be loved and I wanted to be famous,” he said. “It’s a neurotic obsession
with being loved.”
That is not to say that Gross has gone completely soft. Over the past few years he has feuded
bitterly with a neighbour who objected to a sculpture installed at Gross’s Laguna Beach home. The
two have gone to court twice over claims that Gross played loud music, including the theme from
the US television show Gilligan’s Island, to irk his neighbour.
A fed-up judge eventually sentenced Gross to five days in jail for contempt of court but suspended
it when he did community service preparing meals at a local shelter. Gross found the experience of
cutting carrots and onions “instructive” and donated $15,000 to the organisation. But he said he
fears further legal trouble because the neighbour has filed an appeal against the permits that let
Gross keep the sculpture.

Although he remains estranged from the child he had with his second wife, Gross has remarried
and he is close to his two older children. “When you get to your late 70s and early 80s, it’s like the
death zone,” he said. “You just wait for the prostate cancer. But it also allows you to be more happy
in the moment.”
Letter in response to this article:
Volume of mispriced debt recalls the crash of 2007 / From Cathal Rabbitte, Villars-sur-Ollon,
Switzerland

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US economy
US inflation
US interest rates
Federal Reserve
Bill Gross

