FT PROFESSIONAL

FT Swamp Notes US inflation

The great inflation debate — part 2
The big question is exactly how long it will last, and whether it will abate before the midterm elections

Rana Foroohar: ‘Nobody can doubt that prices are rising, and few would say that this will change within the next few months’ ©
REUTERS

Rana Foroohar
Published NOV 15 2021

This article is an on-site version of our Swamp Notes newsletter. Sign up here to get the
newsletter sent straight to your inbox every Monday and Friday

Since there was such interest in last week’s Swamp Notes inflation debate, I thought I’d continue
the topic that Ed began, and add a few thoughts that we didn’t cover the first time round.

Much of the inflation debate today is about timing. Nobody can doubt that prices are rising, and
few would say that this will change within the next few months. The bigger question is exactly how
long inflation will last — and whether it will abate before the 2022 midterm elections.
But what if we were in an entirely different kind of inflationary cycle, one in which inflation will
move up and down in a “complex, noisy and volatile” pattern? It’s a theory put forward in a recent
client note by Michael Purves, the chief executive and founder of Tallbacken Capital Advisors, who
believes the issue isn’t the presence or absence of serious inflation, but rather “inflation
complexity”.
The idea is that, as Ed and I explored last week, there are many different factors in play as we come
out of the pandemic, and they aren’t all pointing the same way. Technology, for example, will
deflate the value of midtown office buildings. But low mortgage rates will undoubtedly continue to
raise house prices — on that note, read my latest column about how a whopping two-thirds of
global income is kept in real estate and land.
So, you have two strong forces moving against each other, creating counter-trends which will affect
different parts of the population quite differently. Purves points out, for example, that robot
installations are up 12 per cent this year. Good for companies trying to keep prices down, not good
for a worker who’s been fired and has to deal with rising heat and fuel prices.
Covid throws a huge spanner into the works in terms of trying to predict any of this, as the inflation
modelling of the last half century just won’t work. Consider this recent bulletin from two
economists at the Bank for International Settlements, which outlines the “bullwhip” effect from the
pandemic, during which purchasing shifted almost entirely from services to goods. This
created bottlenecks in the supply of commodities, intermediate goods and freight transport.
As the report lays out:

“[These] bottlenecks started out as pandemic-related supply disruptions
amid strong demand from the global economic recovery. But they have been
aggravated by the attempts of supply chain participants to build buffers in
already lean production networks — so-called bullwhip effects.
Bottlenecks have been particularly severe in upstream industries — ie, those
that supply inputs used in many other products. These constraints have led
to large international spillovers through global value chains.
The direct inflationary effect of bottlenecks will likely be limited after
relative prices have adjusted. However, sustained inflationary pressures
could emerge if bottlenecks persist long enough to trigger an upward shift
in wage growth and inflation expectations.”
(For more, see this Twitter thread from the excellent BIS economist Hyun Song Shin).
That’s a lot of potentially volatile shifting of inflationary and deflationary trends. Now factor in the
politics of it all, which will encourage some percentage of self-sufficiency and vertical integration,
and thus put more cracks in the neoliberal model of trade.
Purves is betting that this “inflation complexity” will make central bankers err on the side of
dovishness, rather than being pushed to interest rate increases that might require a quick
backtrack. That could, of course, ultimately contribute to serious inflationary pressure (remember
the Weimar Republic!).
As Purves puts it, “in a way, it’s as if the Federal Reserve has suddenly become an [emerging
markets] central bank — facing screwed up supply chains, re-localisation, some commodity
scariness and labour angst”.
Ed, I feel like I’m in an emerging market country every time I take the Brooklyn-Queens
Expressway to the airport. Are there other ways in which America today seems like a developing
nation to you?

Recommended reading
I am with Ross Douthat that “we need new colleges” like the just launched
University of Austin, focused on “the fearless pursuit of truth,” without fear
or favour.
Here’s an interesting piece on why Midwestern factory towns may control
the make-up of Congress in the future.
I just watched the very beautiful and melancholy film Passing on Netflix,
about two black women in the 1920s, one living as the wife of a doctor in
Harlem, another passing as white and married to a racist. I highly
recommend it.
And in the FT, I enjoyed this Lunch with Chris Wallace, though I remain far
more optimistic about the Biden administration.

Edward Luce responds
Rana, I am writing this from Abu Dhabi (where I am attending a conference), which has good
airports and flawless internet connections. To be brutally honest, I am reminded of the poor
quality of US airports and airlines almost whenever I travel abroad, and most of the places that I
go. If Biden’s infrastructure bill can upgrade public transport in all forms, it will have achieved one
of its main purposes, although it could take a while before we begin to feel the improvement.

Let me get back to the spectre of inflation. I don’t have any special insight, and Michael Purves’
observations strike me as reasonable. The causes of inflation are to do with demand relative to
supply, rather than supply chain efficiency per se. So I am not sure technology is inherently
deflationary as you argue in your reply to my last note. Either way, we might be facing a very
different problem a year from now, when the last two years of fiscal support are withdrawn. It
could push the US into a recession in early 2023, as S&P recently warned. If you combine the
coming fiscal crunch with sustained high oil prices, things could start to look really ugly — even
mildly stagflationary. Since I’m in the Gulf, where Saudi Arabia is keeping oil prices high (in league
with Russia, it seems), this ominous prospect is at the forefront of my mind. I think it’s fair to say
neither Mohammed bin Salman nor Vladimir Putin would like to see Biden re-elected.

Your feedback
And now a word from our Swampians . . .
In response to ‘Turns out Larry Summers was right’:
“Ed Luce makes an important call to avoid ‘circling the wagons’ but simplifies things a little too
much. First, he makes it seem like the March stimulus was immediately and wholly converted to
demand. How much of the increased demand was wealthy savers reading How to Spend It, who
would have been looking to spend anyway, as opposed to people who were still struggling without
jobs due to no fault of their own and actually used the money to survive? Summers’s take was more
or less rejected, but it was taken seriously, and much more seriously than those who would write
him off as ‘a hidebound neoliberal’ would have wished (and much more seriously than voices of
dissent on the right . . . In any case, with both Summers and Taliban 2.0, it would have been wrong
to blindly cling to a perspective from decades ago without reassessing. It’s taken political and
public health catastrophes, but for the first time in decades we’re seeing mainstream politicians
flirt with the idea that our social contract was breached and forgotten long ago, and that we need
enormous investment to catch up. I think more people are circling the wagons around that idea as
opposed to tribalism and fear of Trump.”—Joe Jackson, Rocky Hill, New Jersey

“Enjoyed very much your discussion of Larry Summers and whether he is a neoliberal, and agree
with you on the inflationary overuse of the term —and the way in which neoliberalism as a modern
term of abuse has changed almost 180 degrees from what it meant in the 1930s, when it was
conceived as a policy framework that would limit abuse of competition, credit expansion, etc and in
this way defend democracy.” — Harold James, Princeton, New Jersey
Catch up on previous Swamp Notes on FT.com.

We'd love to hear from you. You can email the team on swampnotes@ft.com, contact Ed on
edward.luce@ft.com and Rana on rana.foroohar@ft.com, and follow them on Twitter at
@RanaForoohar and @EdwardGLuce. We may feature an excerpt of your response in the next
newsletter

Recommended newsletters for you
FirstFT Americas — Our pick of the best global news, comment and analysis from the FT and
the rest of the web. Sign up here
Britain after Brexit — Keep up to date with the latest developments as the UK economy adjusts
to life outside the EU. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US economy
US politics & policy
US inflation
FT Swamp Notes
Rana Foroohar

