FT PROFESSIONAL

Market Questions Markets

Will US inflation strengthen the case for a Fed pause?
Market Questions is the FT’s guide to the week ahead

Data shows that average regular petrol prices declined 2.1% month on month © Reuters

Kate Duguid in New York, Martin Arnold in Frankfurt and Valentina Romei in London
Published JUN 11 2023

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel

Will US inflation continue to slow?
US inflation is expected to have slowed meaningfully again in May after only a marginal easing in
April, offering the Federal Reserve a strong justification for pausing interest rate increases in June.

The Bureau of Labor Statistics on Tuesday will release its latest US consumer price index report,
which is expected to show that headline inflation was 4.1 per cent in May, year on year, according
to economists surveyed by Reuters.
That would mark a dramatic improvement from the rate in April of 4.9 per cent, after March’s 5
per cent reading. Compared to the previous month, the consumer price index is expected to have
risen 0.4 per cent.
The data comes ahead of the Fed’s June rate-setting meeting, which will conclude on Wednesday.
The CPI figure is expected to add to the central bank’s conviction that a pause this month in its
historic campaign to increase rates is warranted.
The decline in the headline rate is expected to have been driven by weaker energy prices, Bank of
America analysts argued, citing data from the American Automobile Association. This shows that
average regular petrol prices declined 2.1 per cent month on month.
Core CPI, which strips out the volatile food and energy sectors, is expected to come in at 5.2 per
cent year on year, down slightly from the previous month’s rate of 5.5 per cent. The BofA analysts
argued that core prices will have been kept high by used-car prices. Kate Duguid

How much higher will the ECB raise interest rates?
Eurozone inflation is falling and the currency bloc’s economy is shrinking slightly. But economists
are still convinced that the European Central Bank will raise interest rates by another quarter
percentage point when it meets next week.
There is more doubt about how much higher borrowing costs will go in the 20-country zone, so
ECB-watchers will be listening closely to what its president, Christine Lagarde, says about likely
future rate moves.
Annual inflation in the eurozone has fallen from a peak of 10.6 per cent in October to 6.1 per cent
in May. But rate-setters are likely to still be worried that underlying inflation, which excludes
volatile energy and food prices, is still too high, even though it dipped to 5.3 per cent last month.

“In essence, data continue to be conducive to the ECB raising rates,” said Andrzej Szczepaniak, an
economist at Japanese bank Nomura, pointing out that accelerating eurozone wage growth will
keep services inflation stubbornly high.
Investors are betting that the ECB will raise rates this week and again in July before pausing. A key
signal on future policy will be whether the central bank lowers its inflation forecast but Szczepaniak
thinks it is more likely to raise it.
Dirk Schumacher, an economist at French bank Natixis, expects Lagarde to “stress that an end of
the hiking cycle will crucially depend on a further decline in the core inflation rate in the coming
months and that additional rate hikes remain a clear possibility”. Martin Arnold

Will UK wage growth add to inflationary pressures?
UK economic data is expected to show an acceleration in wage growth next week, driven by a
higher minimum wage and the economy returning to growth in April, which could bolster higher
interest rates expectations.
Economists polled by Reuters forecast that total annual pay growth, published on Tuesday, will
have accelerated to 6.1 per cent in the three months to April from 5.8 per cent in the previous three
months, reflecting around 1.6mn people benefiting from a 9.7 per cent rise in the minimum wage
that took effect in April.
“From the point of view of reducing aggregate cost pressures on inflation, higher earnings growth
would not be helpful,” said Sandra Horsfield, an economist at Investec. Strong wage growth could
support current market expectations that the Bank of England will raise the bank rate above 5 per
cent as it tries to bring inflation back down to its 2 per cent target.
The expected acceleration in wage growth comes despite analysts forecasting that the
unemployment rate will reach 4 per cent in the three months to April, up from 3.9 per cent in the
three months to March.

A stronger than expected rise in gross domestic product, due out on Wednesday, could support the
view that the economy will be able to withstand more interest rate increases. Analysts forecast that
GDP grew 0.3 per cent between March and April, reversing the 0.3 per cent contraction in March,
partially because of fewer strikes in the transport and education sectors.
That would mean that the economy largely stagnated in the three months to April as it has done for
the previous six months. Yet “the fact that the UK economy managed to avoid an outright
contraction over the winter months considering the many headwinds to growth, particularly from
the energy space, is a success story,” Horsfield said. Valentina Romei

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global inflation
Covid-19
US interest rates
Markets
European Central Bank

