FT PROFESSIONAL

US Treasury bonds

Fed’s ‘higher for longer’ message hits US stocks and bonds
Treasuries and Wall Street shares on course for worst month of 2023

Wall Street’s benchmark S&P 500 stock index has fallen more than 5% in September © FT montage/Bloomberg/Dreamstime/Getty
Images

Kate Duguid and Nicholas Megaw in New York and Harriet Clarfelt in London
Published SEP 27 2023

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
US stocks and government bonds are on course for their worst month of the year as investors
respond to the Federal Reserve’s message that interest rates are set to stay higher for longer than
previously thought.
Wall Street’s benchmark S&P 500 stock index has fallen more than 5 per cent in September —
dragging it towards its first quarterly loss in 12 months.

A retreat in the US bond market also accelerated last week after the Fed signalled it would cut rates
much more slowly next year and in 2025 than investors had been pricing in.
The yield on 10-year Treasuries, which rises when prices fall, on Wednesday hit its highest level
since 2007 and is on track for the biggest monthly jump in a year.
“The penny [is] dropping that actually higher for longer means higher for longer,” said Mark
Dowding, chief investment officer at RBC BlueBay Fixed Income. “That realisation is the thing
that’s been hurting sentiment.”
At the beginning of the month, traders in the futures market were betting that interest rates would
be about 4.2 per cent by the end of 2024. Now they are betting on rates of 4.8 per cent by that time.
“The market has been consistently wrong about Fed policy this year,” said Kevin Gordon, senior
investment strategist at Charles Schwab. “For a good chunk of the year the market expectation was
it would be cutting aggressively this year . . . now there’s an embrace of ‘maybe [the Fed] actually
means it’.”
Expectations of a prolonged period of high rates have hit equities because of the impact of higher
bond yields on investors’ quest for returns, as well as the potential effect on the real economy.
The S&P is still up 11 per cent this year, but has been propped up by a small number of heavily
weighted tech stocks that surged earlier in the year fuelled by enthusiasm about artificial
intelligence. The equal-weighted version of the index this week fell back into negative territory for
the year.
Corporate debt markets have also been affected, as investors worry that highly indebted companies
may struggle to refinance their borrowings in the face of higher rates.
The average interest rate for US junk bonds has risen from 8.5 per cent to almost 9 per cent this
month, outpacing the rise in Treasury yields.
The shift in the US has come as the Fed reacts to strong economic data and a still hot labour
market, which contrast with the eurozone and the UK, where fears of a downturn — which would
reduce pressure to keep interest rates high to control inflation — are greater.

“It’s like the market is finally getting on board with the view that we’re not on the brink of a
recession,” said Sonal Desai, chief investment officer at Franklin Templeton Fixed Income.
Fed officials last week lowered their forecasts for unemployment and increased their growth
predictions.
While the central bank held its main interest rate steady in a range of 5.25 per cent to 5.5 per cent,
projections by its policymakers signalled one more increase this year.
Soaring oil prices compounded market worries about persistent inflation and tight monetary
policy.
Brent crude jumped nearly 3 per cent on Wednesday to a 10-month high of more than $97 a barrel,
as lower than expected US stockpiles added to fears of a global supply shortfall.
Some investors predict that higher rates could eventually push the economy towards recession
despite the recent strong data.
“One of our concerns is that the lagged effect of Fed tightening will catch up with the economy as
we move into 2024,” said Jeff Schulze, head of economic and market strategy at ClearBridge
Investments. “The longer rates are up there, the higher the chance.”
Letter in response to this article:
Fed rates slogan should read: ‘Normal for longer’ / From Alex J Pollock, Senior Fellow, Mises
Institute, Lake Forest, IL, US

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US Treasury bonds
Bonds

Global inflation
US interest rates
Markets

