FT PROFESSIONAL

The Week Ahead Global Economy

Jay Powell’s big week

Plus, court hearing begins in Murdoch succession saga and the FT Business Book of the Year shortlist is
announced

The US Federal Reserve is expected to cut interest rates by as much as half a percentage point © Bloomberg

Melody Abike Adebisi
Published SEP 15 2024

This article is an on-site version of our The Week Ahead newsletter. Subscribers can sign up here
to get the newsletter delivered every Sunday. Explore all of our newsletters here

Hello and welcome to the working week.

The week ahead is a significant one for central banks on both sides of the pond, with the Federal
Reserve and the Bank of England each set to announce interest rate decisions. First up on
Wednesday is the Fed, where it would seem the question is no longer if there will be a rate cut, but
rather by how much.
While markets on Friday ascribed a 57 per cent probability to a quarter-point cut, investors had
sharply increased their bets on a half-percentage-point interest rate, as the US central bank makes
moves to lower borrowing costs for the first time in more than four years.
Data released last Tuesday showed that US inflation fell to 2.5 per cent in August. “Disinflation is
an imperfect journey but it’s certainly happening,” Kristina Hooper, chief global market strategist
at Invesco, told the FT last week.

In the UK, my colleague Valentina Romei reported that public confidence in the BoE’s strategy to
handle inflation took a positive turn in August, for the first time in more than two years, according
to official data ahead of the bank’s rate decision that will take place on Thursday.

Markets largely expect the BoE to keep UK rates on hold, but underwhelming figures from last
Tuesday’s GDP report for July have slightly increased the odds of a rate cut. Earlier this month,
Michael Saunders, senior economic adviser at Oxford Economics and a former external member of
the BoE’s Monetary Policy Committee, theorised that the UK’s rate-cutting cycle could be quicker
than expected. He concluded that “market pricing currently implies that Bank Rate will fall to
about 3.75% at end-2025 and stay around 3.5% thereafter”.
In companies news, we can expect half-year results from B&Q and Screwfix owner Kingfisher, Q3
results from online grocery retailer Ocado and half-year results from clothing retailer Next.

One more thing . . .

Apple’s new range of devices will hit stores on Friday © Bloomberg

Tech lovers who are unable to release themselves from the ever-tight shackles of Apple products
should brace themselves for the range of new devices that will hit stores on Friday, including the
iPhone 16, Apple Watch Series 10 and AirPods 4. The company came under fire earlier this year for
its alleged use of illegally exported minerals from the war-torn east of the Democratic Republic of
Congo. At the time, Apple’s disclosures said the company had “no reasonable basis for concluding”
that any of its tin, tungsten and tantalum smelters or refiners “directly or indirectly financed”
armed groups in the DRC or adjoining countries.
Apple has been expanding its use of recycled materials in its products to reduce its consumption of
such metals and minerals, which we hope has been reflected in the release of its “most innovative
line-up yet”.

Key economic and company reports
Here is a more complete list of what to expect in terms of company reports and economic data this
week.

Monday
Rightmove: Rightmove House Price Index
Results: Octopus Renewables Infrastructure Trust Q2 earnings

Tuesday
UK: Light rail and tram statistics — 2023-24
US: Retail sales
Results: Kingfisher HY

Wednesday
US: Federal Open Market Committee interest rate decision and press
conference from chair Jay Powell
UK: monthly inflation figures
UK: House Price Index
UK: producer price index
Results: PZ Cuzzons, FY

Thursday
UK: BoE rate decision

US: Initial jobless claims
Business insights and impact on the UK economy statistics
UK: Annual savings statistics
Results: Next HY, FedEx Q1

Friday
UK: Public sector finances
UK: Monthly retail sales figures
Japan: Monetary policy meeting decision
US Labor Department, Bureau of Labor Statistics: State Employment and
Unemployment, monthly report (Aug 2024)

World events
Finally, here is a rundown of other events and milestones this week.

Monday
UK: The Booker Prize for Fiction shortlist announced
Italy: Sir Keir Starmer meets Italian prime minister Giorgia Meloni in
Rome
UN Security Council briefing and consultations on the humanitarian
situation in Gaza

US: Court hearings set to begin in Murdoch family succession saga
UK: Former BBC presenter Huw Edwards sentenced after pleading guilty to
accessing indecent images of children

Tuesday
Financial Times and Schroders Business Book of the year shortlist
announced Catch up on the longlist here.
Italy: Milan Fashion Week starts
UK: Inaugural Sky Arts Awards

Wednesday
ACEEU Europe-Africa Forum 2024 begins
UK: BIEE biennial policy conference

Thursday
UK: BMW PGA Championship gets under way
UN Security Council discusses Israeli settlements
St Kitts and Nevis: Independence Day

Friday
US: First states begin early in-person voting in presidential election
UK: Reform leader Nigel Farage speaks at his party’s national conference

Brazil: G20 tourism ministers meeting

Saturday
Sri Lanka: presidential election where recent polls have projected a strong
showing for People’s Liberation Front leader Anura Kumara Dissanayake.
US: Republican VP nominee JD Vance speaks at Tucker Carlson Live Tour
stop in Pennsylvania
World Alzheimer’s Day

Sunday
UK: Labour party conference commences
UN Summit of the Future starts
Singapore: F1 Grand Prix
US: NYC Climate Week begins

Recommended newsletters for you
Inside Politics — What you need to know in UK politics. Sign up here
US Election countdown — Money and politics in the race for the White House. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
The Week Ahead
Melody Abike Adebisi

