FT PROFESSIONAL

Federal Reserve

Fed likely to make ‘material’ changes to controversial bank capital proposals, Jay Powell
says
US central bank chair adds that inflation goal not ‘assured’ and cautions about rate cut timing

Jay Powell: ‘Reducing policy restraint too soon or too much could result in a reversal of progress we have seen in inflation’ © Kevin
Lamarque/Reuters

Claire Jones in Washington and Joshua Franklin in New York
Published MAR 6 2024 | Updated MAR 6 2024, 13:00

The chair of the Federal Reserve said it was likely to make “broad and material changes” to
proposals to rewrite banks’ capital rules, as Republicans called for the existing interpretation of the
so-called Basel III endgame package to be scrapped.
Jay Powell told lawmakers on Wednesday that he did “hear the concerns” from lenders over the US
interpretation of capital standards crafted by global regulators that form the Basel Committee on
Banking Supervision.

“I do expect that there will be broad and material changes to the proposal,” he said, as he gave his
semi-annual testimony on monetary policy to Congress.
The Fed, together with other US regulators, has faced strong criticism from the banking industry
over what would constitute the biggest change to capital requirements since the Dodd-Frank act
was introduced in the wake of the global financial crisis.
The current proposals would require the biggest US banks to hold a greater amount of capital,
which can absorb losses, against their assets. Banks have argued that this would constrain their
ability to lend without making the financial system significantly safer.
They also complain the US interpretation is stricter than that of other countries, for example by
requiring lenders to phase out any use of internal models to calculate risk weights.
Powell said he had never seen a regulatory proposal elicit so much criticism, adding that there were
“real concerns” the plans could increase risks to the banking system and undermine market
competition.
He said that while the Fed had not yet decided what changes to make to the proposal, it would not
“hesitate” to make them if needed.
Advocacy groups for banks have taken the unusual step of broadcasting TV adverts against the
Basel III endgame during high-profile American football games, and have also raised the prospect
of suing the Fed should the central bank refuse to make big changes.
Banks have won allies from regular users of hedging products like farming groups as well as from
the renewable power industry, which warned that the changes could hamper clean-energy projects.
They have also garnered the support of Republicans in the House, who called on the heads of the
Federal Reserve, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Office of the Comptroller of
the Currency in a letter on Wednesday to “withdraw this flawed proposal”.
The Fed chair said he welcomed the industry’s “voluminous and very substantive” response to the
proposals, which the central bank received by January when the window for feedback closed.

The letter from House Republicans claimed 97 per cent of those responses were negative.
“This broad-based opposition makes clear that it is not just the banking industry crying wolf
against heightened capital requirements,” the letter said. “As issued, the proposal lacks
justification, lacks rigorous quantitative analysis, and is procedurally flawed.”
In prepared remarks to lawmakers on the topic of the economy, Powell acknowledged
“considerable progress” and said interest rates, currently at a 23-year high in a range of 5.25 to 5.5
per cent, were unlikely to rise again.
However, he told lawmakers that progress towards reaching the US Federal Reserve’s 2 per cent
inflation goal was not “assured” and that rate cuts would have to wait until officials were more
confident of hitting their target.
“Reducing policy restraint too soon or too much could result in a reversal of progress we have seen
in inflation and ultimately require even tighter policy to get inflation back to 2 per cent,” Powell
said. “At the same time, reducing policy restraint too late or too little could unduly weaken
economic activity and employment.”
The Federal Open Market Committee next votes on March 20, and its members have repeatedly
said they want to gain “greater confidence” that inflation can sustainably hit 2 per cent.
Headline personal consumption expenditures inflation, the measure the Fed targets, rose 2.4 per
cent in the year to January, down from 2.6 per cent in December. However, the month-on-month
rate edged up slightly, sparking concern that the deceleration in price pressures could soon come to
a halt.
Month-on-month core PCE, the Fed’s preferred gauge of underlying inflation, also rose between
January and December.
Markets have trimmed their expectations of Fed cuts this year. Investors now expect three or four
quarter-point moves beginning in the summer — a shift from earlier this year when they expected
six cuts starting this month.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US banks
US economy
US inflation
US interest rates
Federal Reserve

