FT PROFESSIONAL

Markets Briefing Equities

Global stocks drift as investors weigh Fed tone against inflation pressures
Business surveys show companies struggling with price rises

A eurozone survey that collates business responses to questions about new orders and input costs shows companies are struggling
with rising prices for manufacturers’ material © Bloomberg

Naomi Rovnick in London
Published JUN 23 2021 | Updated JUN 23 2021, 16:34

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
US stocks slipped on Wednesday but remained near record highs as investors weighed dovish
comments by Federal Reserve officials with business surveys showing companies were struggling
with inflation.

The S&P 500 slid 0.1 per cent, erasing a marginal advance in the final half-hour of trading. The
technology-focused Nasdaq Composite index climbed 0.1 per cent, building on highs hit a day
earlier. Shares of smaller companies also rose moderately, with the Russell 2000 index gaining 0.3
per cent.
After US central bank officials last week brought forward their projections of the first postpandemic rate rise by a year to 2023, Fed policymakers have moved quickly to soothe fears of a
policy mistake that could derail the economic recovery.
“We have to make sure our policies don’t pivot in ways that make it look like we are declaring
victory prematurely,” Raphael Bostic, Atlanta Fed president, told National Public Radio on
Wednesday.
Jay Powell, Fed chair, said on Tuesday that the central bank would not act “pre-emptively” on “the
possible onset of inflation”.

The market narrative around inflation, which erodes the real returns from stocks and bonds, was
“changing day to day”, said Fahad Kamal, chief investment officer at Kleinwort Hambros, “because
the data itself is confusing”.
US service sector and manufacturing activity expanded rapidly in June, an early reading of IHS
Markit’s purchasing managers’ index showed, although the gauge dropped from the previous
month’s record level. The index, where a reading of 50 separates expansion from contraction, fell
to 63.9 from 68.7 in May as businesses suffered from inflationary pressures.
“Manufacturers continued to note rapid increases in raw material and fuel costs, whilst service
providers highlighted higher wage bills to attract workers,” IHS said.
The eurozone version of the index rose to a 15-year high of 59.2 points, although IHS also found “a
record increase in manufacturers’ material prices”, accompanied by “the steepest increase in
service sector costs since July 2008”.
Headline US consumer price rises hit 5 per cent in the 12 months to May, but Powell told Congress
on Tuesday that the Fed would wait for “actual evidence of actual inflation” before tightening
monetary policy.
“Tepid moves” in equity markets showed investors were “paralysed” after Fed officials expressed
diverse views on interest rates, said Savvas Savouri, chief economist at UK-based hedge fund
Toscafund. Wall Street’s S&P 500 index has advanced by only about 1 per cent in the past month,
as debate rages over when the Fed would withdraw its pandemic-era support.
Larger swings have instead been seen in growth and value stocks, two investment styles that have
oscillated in popularity over the past year. Since the start of June, the S&P 500 growth index has
advanced 4 per cent. And valuations of non-profitable technology groups have leapt, with an index
run by investment bank Goldman Sachs that includes companies like Lyft and DoorDash up 12 per
cent.
The S&P 500 value index has dropped by 2 per cent by contrast.

The yield on the benchmark 10-year US Treasury bond edged up 0.03 percentage points to 1.49 per
cent on Wednesday.
The dollar index, which measures the greenback against other main currencies, was up 0.1 per
cent. The euro fell 0.1 per cent against the dollar to $1.1925. Sterling rose 0.1 per cent to $1.3959.
The region-wide Stoxx Europe 600 closed down 0.7 per cent, but remained close to its high.
Brent crude, the international oil benchmark, settled 0.5 per cent higher at $75.19, its highest level
since October 2018, after demand recovered while oil-producing nations restricted supplies.
Additional reporting by David Sheppard in London and Eric Platt in New York

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Currencies
Asia-Pacific equities
European equities
US equities
UK equities

