FT PROFESSIONAL

Chris Giles on Central Banks Central banks

Three questions for Jay Powell

The Fed went all out last week. The aftershocks of the jumbo cut are still reverberating

Last week the Federal Reserve kicked off its easing cycle with a half-point rate cut © AFP via Getty Images

Elettra Ardissino
Published SEP 24 2024

This article is an on-site version of our Chris Giles on Central Banks newsletter. Premium
subscribers can sign up here to get the newsletter delivered every Tuesday. Standard
subscribers can upgrade to Premium here, or explore all FT newsletters

The last time the Federal Reserve, Bank of Japan and Bank of England all met in the same week, it
was the BoJ’s hawkish hike that made the weather in markets over the days that followed.
This time, the Fed’s decision to start the cutting cycle with a half-point bang last week largely
overshadowed the BoE and BoJ’s prudent holds, propelling the S&P 500 to new highs.

As is customary, the central bank’s chair Jay Powell took questions from journalists at the poststatement press conference. Yet the Federal Open Market Committee’s about-face on its previous
guidance raises a host of other, harder-to-answer, ones.
Here are a few of the most important.

1. What does data dependency really mean?
Self-possessed and relaxed, Powell conveyed confidence, even optimism, as he explained the rate
decision. “Nothing to see here,” he seemed to be saying. It worked: investors reacted positively,
dispelling previous fears that they would read a large cut as a sign of panic from policymakers.
But his framing was a little disingenuous. With the half-point cut, the FOMC backtracked on earlier
indications that it would start the easing cycle with a regular 0.25 percentage point move. Even
more importantly, the new Summary of Economic Projections quietly introduced a major
reassessment of what the central bank needs to do to keep the US economy on track for a soft
landing.
The new GDP growth forecasts were basically unchanged from June. Inflation forecasts were lower
and unemployment forecasts higher, but they did not indicate a substantially different economic
environment to forecasts three months ago.
But the rate path that Fed policymakers think is required to get there is now much lower.

US Fed signals further rate cuts by end of 2024
Each dot represents one FOMC participant's projection for the midpoint of US interest rates (%) from
every meeting since December 2023
Sep 2024

Jun 2024

Mar 2024

5

Dec 2023

Current rate
Current
rate

4

3

2

1

0

2024

2025

2026

2027

Longer run

Source: Federal Reserve
FT graphic: Sam Learner

Powell would probably say that this is simply data dependency in practice: policymakers change
their view as the data changes. “We took all of those [data] and . . . concluded that this was the right
thing for the economy,” he said. Had he been challenged about the dot-plot revisions, he would
have presumably given a similar answer.
But there are issues with this narrative.

The change between the June and September dot plots is big. Earlier this year, it took several
months of bad inflation data for rate-setters to notch down their projected number of 2024 cuts
from three to one. By contrast, the past few months’ labour market data, even if slightly
disappointing, is not flashing red. “The labour market is actually in solid condition . . . you’re close
to mandate, maybe at mandate, on that,” Powell said during the press conference.
It doesn’t sound like a solid basis to justify the major dovish shift that took place below the SEP’s
surface. Was Powell accurate in saying that the Fed is responding to the data, or were other
considerations in play?

2. Is the Fed losing the markets — if so, is that a bad thing?
The markets had seen the cut coming. Investors started seeing some chance of a half-point rate cut
as far back as July, despite policymakers’ insistence that the Fed would, in all likelihood, ease only
gradually. Ultimately, the traders’ call prevailed.
Believers in the Fed put clearly feel vindicated — and are doubling down. Markets currently expect
it to reach its forecast terminal rate of 2.9 per cent in September 2025, more than a year ahead of
the median rate-setter’s forecasts. In other words, they expect the Fed to deliver around eight cuts
over the next 12 months or so. The Fed itself is projecting only six.
What might that mean for the Fed?

Markets are more dovish than the Fed
Projected Fed funds rate (%)
Market expectations

September 2024 dot plot

4.5

4

3.5

3

2.5

2
December 2024

June 2025

December 2025

June 2026

December 2026

Source: Bloomberg, FT calculations • The dot plot's quarterly projections are FT interpolations
based on the annual figures provided in the SEP.

It could be that markets no longer believe the rate-setters. That would be rational, given how bad
the dot plot has been at accurately predicting the Fed’s subsequent rate path. That raises the
question of whether, if its decision-making truly is data dependent, the dot plot might not be
ditched. Far from communicating policy clearly, it may be hurting policymakers’ credibility.
But overly dovish markets might be helpful in other ways. Powell said emphatically last Wednesday
that the bank was not yet declaring victory over inflation. If markets keep financial conditions loose
beyond the Fed’s own indications, the central bank can have it all: a stance that is “roughly
balanced” between the two sides of its dual mandate, coupled with the stimulative effect of lower
borrowing costs in the real economy.

The risk is that the reckoning, in the form of a big market correction, will eventually come. On a
more positive note, anyone who is not bored with knife-edge 25-or-50 debates has plenty to look
forward to.

3. How politically dangerous was the decision?
Presidential candidate Donald Trump is, to put it mildly, unusually attentive to Fed decisions. It
surprised no one that he weighed in on the rate cut.
“It shows the economy is very bad . . . assuming that they are not just playing politics,” he said.
Some, though not all, GOP lawmakers took the same view. Trump’s running mate JD Vance was
uncharacteristically circumspect.
On the Democratic side, President Joe Biden called it a “declaration of progress” and attempted to
link inflation’s decline to his administration’s policies. Vice-president and Trump rival Kamala
Harris simply called it “welcome news”.
Powell has a strong record of defying political pressure on rate moves. Though his 2019 spat with
Trump is most memorable, some Democrats have also unsuccessfully attempted to sway the Fed’s
rate decisions.
But Trump has made overt threats to the Fed’s independence before. The decision to start the
easing cycle on the eve of an extremely tight election is very unlikely to curry the central bank any
favour with the volatile former president.
Something more to worry about if Trump wins in November.

The view from overseas
The Fed cut has also featured heavily in central bankers’ comments beyond US shores.
Start with the BoJ, which held rates on Friday. The central bank is on a gradual journey to
normalisation, and markets have long considered Fed rates play a key role in its pace through their
effects on the yen. The Japanese currency had long been seen as too weak, but following a flash
market crash and rapid appreciation of the yen in early August, markets unwound bets on further
BoJ increases next year.

At Friday’s press conference, governor Kazuo Ueda acknowledged that the BoJ would be watching
developments in the US closely. “One factor we’d like to look at is whether the US economy will
achieve a soft landing, or whether the slowdown could be a bit more severe,” he reportedly said,
while reiterating that the BoJ would increase rates again if its economic forecasts were realised.
But markets did not really react, perhaps believing that the BoJ is worried about excessive yen
strengthening as well as weakening.
At the European Central Bank, Italy’s Fabio Panetta, a dovish member of the governing council,
seized on the US’s jumbo cut as a reason to deliver more easing in the near term. This argument is
unlikely to have traction, not least because earlier this year Panetta had argued that the ECB
should cut faster if the Fed’s stance proved tighter than expected.

Market expectations of the ECB and BoJ's rate moves did not change as a
result of the large Fed cut
Benchmark rate forecast for June 2025 (%)
Eurozone (LHS)

Japan (RHS)

3

0.5

2.8
0.4
2.6
Fed
decision

2.4
0.3
2.2

2
July 2024

August 2024

September 2024

0.2

Source: Bloomber

The ECB arguably has little to fear from the spillover effects of a faster US cutting cycle: it would
boost export demand for European products, driving growth, and strengthen the euro, which is
disinflationary. If the Eurozone economy does not rebound as the governing council currently
expects, the ECB may well accelerate its own cutting cycle in the coming months. But the Fed
probably won’t have much to do with it.

What I’ve been reading and watching
Craig Coben’s fascinating article on how the German government
mismanaged the sale of its Commerzbank shares, allowing UniCredit to
swoop in and JPMorgan to earn a hefty fee.
This handy article from Politico unpacks which countries are up and which
are down in Ursula von der Leyen’s new team of commissioners — and
what her picks signal about the EU’s priorities over the next five years.
Should the Bank of England change its name? This is one of several
provocative proposals about how to reform the Old Lady that Tony Yates
would like Rachel Reeves to consider. FT readers can join in on the poll.
Lionel Barber’s profile of Masayoshi Son, investor and inveterate risk-taker
whose career spanned 1980s Japan, the 2000s dotcom boom and the
golden years of venture capital in the 2010s, but whose record has been
blighted by a poor sense of timing (among other reasons). His bets are now
on AI. But has he missed the train?

A chart that matters
Between profit warnings, botched forced labour audits and mass lay-off plans, European
carmakers have had a terrible month. Once an engine of export revenue, employment and
economic growth, the sector is now stalled, buffeted by competition from Chinese carmakers at
home and abroad.

The EU is gearing up to raise tariffs on Chinese electric vehicle imports. A decision is expected in
the next few weeks. But whether investors’ minds about the sector will change is another matter.
The EU’s biggest auto names have been a major drag on the European stock index in the past few
months, as the chart below shows.

European carmakers are dragging on the region's stock index
Total return, January 1, 2024=100
Stoxx600

Volkswagen

BMW

Mercedes

120

100

80

Jan 24

Feb 24

Mar 24

Apr 24

May 24

Jun 24

Jul 24

Aug 24

Sep 24
Source: Bloomber

Recommended newsletters for you
Free lunch — Your guide to the global economic policy debate. Sign up here
Trade Secrets — A must-read on the changing face of international trade and globalisation.
Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
US interest rates
Central banks
Federal Reserve
Chris Giles on Central Banks

