FT PROFESSIONAL

US economy

US jobless claims hit six-month high as labour demand cools
Lay-offs have hit technology, retail and crypto businesses

In the week to July 30, there were 260,000 initial jobless claims on a seasonally adjusted basis, according to US labour department
data released on Thursday © AFP/Getty Images

Lydia Tomkiw in New York
Published AUG 4 2022

The number of people applying for unemployment aid in the US reached the highest level in more
than six months last week, amid growing signs the historically tight labour market could be
cooling.
In the week to July 30, there were 260,000 initial jobless claims on a seasonally adjusted basis,
according to labour department data released on Thursday. That was the largest weekly tally since
mid-January and slightly above economists’ expectations of 259,000 claims. The claims serve as a
proxy for lay-offs.

The previous week’s claims were revised down from 256,000 to 254,000, while the four-week
average, which smooths week-by-week volatility, rose to 254,750, its highest point since November.
Economists at Oxford Economics said there was a risk that jobless claims would continue to “drift”
higher as labour market conditions cool, but added this should not be a cause for alarm.
“We don’t anticipate a sharp rise from current levels any time soon as demand for workers
continues to outstrip supply,” said Oxford lead US economist Nancy Vanden Houten.
Companies across sectors including technology, digital assets and retail have announced hiring
slowdowns and dismissals in recent weeks amid rising inflation and higher input costs.
Walmart announced on Wednesday it would cut approximately 200 corporate roles across various
departments as part of a restructuring. It comes after the retailer issued its second profit warning
in just over two months and has resorted to aggressive price cuts as high inflation hits consumer
demand for goods.
Brokerage Robinhood cited the “extremely challenging macro environment” when it said earlier
this week it would lay off almost a quarter of its staff — roughly 780 employees — as the retail
trading boom loses steam amid a decline in customer activity. That follows a 9 per cent cut of fulltime staff in April.
Streaming platform Netflix, social media company Twitter and electric carmaker Tesla have all also
announced lay-offs in recent weeks, while tech groups Meta and Alphabet announced they would
slow down their hiring for the rest of the year.
Demand for US workers decreased in June with the number of job openings down to 10.7mn from
11.3mn in May, according to the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey released earlier this
week by the labour department. Despite the decline, the number of workers who were laid off was
little-changed at 1.3mn and the number of workers voluntarily quitting their jobs is still at above
pre-coronavirus pandemic levels at 4.2mn in June even as the economy slows.

The increase in claims could be an early sign of cooling demand for labour, but it’s not yet a
concrete signal, Joshua Shapiro, chief US economist at MFR, said in a note. While companies face
cost cuts, they are “recognising how difficult it has been to attract and keep qualified workers”.
The number of Americans actively receiving unemployment aid was 1.42mn in the week ending
July 23. The previous week’s figure was revised up to 1.37mn from 1.36mn.
Economists expect the unemployment rate to hold steady at 3.6 per cent when July’s employment
report is released on Friday, according to a Bloomberg survey.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
US economy
Covid-19
US employment
US

