FT PROFESSIONAL

Unhedged US inflation

Inflation’s slow grind down
Avoiding the worst still isn’t much fun

© Financial Times

Robert Armstrong and Ethan Wu
Published OCT 7 2022

This article is an on-site version of our Unhedged newsletter. Sign up here to get the newsletter
sent straight to your inbox every weekday

Good morning. Life of a markets journalist, late 2022. Wake up, stare at computer, ask self:
anything to write about except inflation and the Federal Reserve? Answer from the News Gods: no.
It’s still the biggest and, most days, most interesting story out there. If you have other ideas, send
them: robert.armstrong@ft.com and ethan.wu@ft.com.

Inflation: probably getting better, slowly
After today’s payrolls numbers drop, the market will have to, once again, recalibrate its estimate of
how much the labour market is or isn’t tightening and how the Fed will or won’t react. But
remember why we care about the labour market so much right now: because of inflation. A tight
labour market creates wage inflation and wage inflation is sticky and contagious — that’s the
orthodoxy, anyway. What started as a goods price spike driven by tight supply chains, lockdown
spending habits and stimulus cheques has turned into a surge in wage-sensitive services prices.
The job market is important. But let’s keep our eyes on the ball: what is inflation itself doing? It is
easy to just shrug sadly and say “it’s high”. So it is, but the story is subtle, and continues to evolve.
The details reward attention.
The first thing to say is that headline CPI has peaked. In both month-on-month and year-on-year
terms, the top came in June and (at risk of tempting fate) a return to that level seems unlikely.
Many commodity and transport prices are falling fast and (for what it’s worth) job listings are
declining, too. There are lots of charts that look like this in circulation:

But the Fed is not going to be much impressed by these volatile, goods-driven prices in headline
CPI. The focus now is squarely on core CPI — and more specifically on services such as housing,
where wages are thought to be particularly important. Here is the economist Jason Furman,
arguing in the Wall Street Journal this week that the Fed must not let up:

Optimists point to signs that inflation will moderate. The latest signal is the
large decline in job openings, but there are also falling home prices, falling
shipping costs, falling commodity prices . . . however, labour markets are still
much tighter than at any point before the pandemic, and many of the other
frequently cited factors have only a small or uncertain relationship to
inflation. Many other signs go in the opposite direction . . . Wage inflation
has picked up over the course of the year, and rent on existing leases remains
well below rent on new leases.

Services inflation contains a ton of stuff, but three categories — shelter (42 per cent of core CPI),
medical care (9) and transportation (8) — have dominated in recent months. This chart from
Omair Sharif of Inflation Insights shows which inflation categories have driven up inflation the
most since April (OER is owners’ equivalent rent, or what homeowners would rent their house out
for):

Start with transportation services. Look beneath the hood and you quickly spot the bit that’s on
fire: airfares. Since the pandemic, plane ticket prices have been exceptionally volatile.

This isn’t terribly shocking given pandemic disruptions to travel and fuel prices, but with the
Omicron coronavirus variant hit to travel well behind us, we’re surprised how volatile airfares have
remained. A slowing economy is cutting air travel demand, but the holiday season will boost it.
Alan Detmeister, an economist at UBS, figures airfares, and transportation services inflation, won’t
fall consistently until next year.
Medical care services are more interesting. As we’ve written, prices here hinge on insurance
company earnings data that is updated once yearly, and on a long lag. As a result, Detmeister
points out, every CPI report published so far this year has been based on price data comparing
2020 to 2019. When new data comes in October’s CPI report, all the analysts we talked to expect
medical services will get squashed, dragging down core services.
You’ll notice that neither of these two categories really contains the usual story about wages or a
tight labour market. As Sharif put it to us:

I just see people blindly looking generally at core services, seeing how high it
is, and saying, ‘Oh, this is obviously a function of wage growth’ . . . What will
people be saying in three months’ time when medical care becomes a drag on
core services and transportation isn’t showing 14-15 per cent in airfares?
The last category, shelter, is inflation’s key link to a tight labour market. You can observe that
empirically, but the intuition is plain enough. Here’s Detmeister again (notice that he emphasises
stable employment over wages):

If you get a job, and a stable job, then you’re more willing to move out of a
group house to have your own place. You’re more willing to move out from
living with your parents. So [shelter inflation] is more tightly linked with the
unemployment rate than with wage growth itself.
We’ve long known shelter inflation would come in hot this year, but it’s becoming clear that the
peak is due soon (if it hasn’t come already). CPI’s shelter components are based on rental data. And
private market rent indices kept by websites such as Zillow and Apartment List have been
decelerating:

Remember that what makes an inflation rate go up is not whether rents are increasing, but whether
they are accelerating. So for this index, the tip of the hump above should represent peak rent
inflation.
Of course, the Zillow index is not an exact apples-to-apples comparison. It measures newly signed
leases, while CPI rent indices captures the full universe of new and existing leases. But it does offer
a look into the future. CPI rent tends to follow the private indices on a lag, the median of which is
eight months, according to Nomura’s Aichi Amemiya. That pattern, he says, suggests month-onmonth rent inflation should start falling around January, though gradually.
The point is that while the jobs market-inflation story matters, current data suggest the worst has
passed. Put together, we have a picture of services inflation that will moderate, slowly, as airfares
eventually settle, new data deflate medical care and CPI rent indices catch up with current
conditions.

For markets, the optimistic bit is that a cataclysmic wage-price spiral looks unlikely. But avoiding
disaster doesn’t mean inflation’s grinding descent will be pleasant. We’d guess that there won’t be
enough good inflation news to knock the Fed off its march to 4-5 per cent rates. In the meantime,
plenty else could go wrong. (Ethan Wu)

One good read
Are the current disruptions the birth pangs of a new economic regime? Or just a temporary
interruption of the old one? Our bet is on the latter. The Economist has put its chips on the former.

Recommended newsletters for you
Cryptofinance — Scott Chipolina filters out the noise of the global cryptocurrency industry.
Sign up here
Swamp Notes — Expert insight on the intersection of money and power in US politics. Sign up
here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US economy
US inflation
Federal Reserve
Unhedged
Ethan Wu

