FT PROFESSIONAL

© FT Montage/PA

Global Economy

Inflation surge fuels negative real interest rates for leading economies
Central banks are reluctant to tighten too abruptly arguing spike in prices is transitory

John Paul Rathbone and Valentina Romei in London
Published NOV 9 2021

The surge in inflation is leaving the world’s leading economies with their lowest real interest rates
in decades, as central banks delay any abrupt tightening of the extra-loose monetary policy used to
help weather the coronavirus crisis, arguing that the recent rise in prices is transitory.
Real interest rates, which subtract inflation from central bank policy rates, reflect the real cost of
borrowing and real return on savings. The combination of accelerating inflation in the US,
eurozone and UK, and their central banks’ decision to remain patient when it comes to rate
increases, effectively raises monetary stimulus despite these countries being close to recovering
lost output from the crisis.
Real interest rates “will remain at historically low levels for the next several years”, said Elena
Duggar, managing director at the rating agency Moody’s.

In the US, where nominal interest rates are near zero, real rates stand at around -5.3 per cent. They
are at -3 per cent in the UK and -4.6 per cent in Germany, according to Financial Times analysis.

Those remain highly stimulative interest rates, given that multiple studies suggest the neutral real
interest rate — which neither deters nor encourages borrowers and investors — has fallen in
developed economies to around zero today, from roughly 4 per cent in the 1980s.
The last time real rates were as negative as today was in the 1970s, when rising energy prices
pushed up inflation, studies show. Real interest rates also slumped in the wake of the 2008
financial crisis.
Negative rates “keep financing conditions accommodative and should support credit growth, as it
makes the cost of debt sustainable”, said Ana Boata, global head of economic research at Euler
Hermes Group.

This may help governments finance the massive debts they took on during the pandemic. However,
as negative rates are stimulative in monetary policy terms, Boata warned that they could cause
already richly valued financial markets to “become exceedingly unsustainable, causing concerns
about financial stability risks”.
The big exception is China, where real rates are already positive despite slowing growth. Last week,
the Czech Republic and Poland joined countries such as Russia, Mexico and Brazil in raising
interest rates aggressively. But higher inflation meant that real rates remained negative. However,
as inflation is forecast to fall next year, real rates will turn positive — rising up to as much as 3.3
per cent in Brazil and 3 per cent in Russia — reflecting the perceived risk premium traditionally
attached to investing in emerging markets.
In developed economies, central banks are only slowly removing the massive stimulus put in place
during the pandemic, even though economists have revised up their inflation forecasts recently on
the back of supply chain problems and surging energy prices.

Last week, US Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell said it was too early to raise interest rates. The Fed,
which has begun reducing its bond-buying programme, said that US inflation — currently running
at a 13-year high of 5.4 per cent — was due to factors “that are expected to be transitory”.
Christine Lagarde, European Central Bank president, also pushed back on expectations that rates
would rise next year despite inflation rising to a 13-year high of 4.1 per cent in October. She said
the ECB, which had also slowed its pandemic bond-buying programme, expected inflation to fall
next year.
Similarly, the Bank of England last week backed away from an immediate increase in nominal rates
from their historic low of 0.1 per cent, even though it predicted inflation would reach 5 per cent
early next year before falling back.
Yet even if inflation does retreat, real rates are expected to remain negative. Using consensus
inflation forecasts for 2022, real rates are expected to stand at around -3.3 per cent in the US, -2.7
per cent in Germany and -3.2 per cent in the UK.

Even for the central banks of Canada and Australia, which have signalled that they may raise rates
soon, inflation of more than 3 per cent combined with a near zero level of interest means they also
have negative real rates.
“Real rates are going to be well below most estimates of neutral [rates] for the foreseeable future,”
said Neil Shearing, chief economist at Capital Economics.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
Global inflation
Central banks
Negative interest rates
Monetary policy

