FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Global Economy

The future of interest rates is a riddle
Inflation’s comeback has changed the world — but how much we don’t yet know

MARTIN WOLF

© James Ferguson

Martin Wolf
Published APR 18 2023

The return of inflation has surprised many, including central bankers. So has the resulting rise in
nominal interest rates. These surprises have brought others with them, notably a mini-shock to
banking.
The question, then, is: “What next?” Will inflation subside to ultra-low pre-Covid levels or will it be
a lasting problem, as in the 1970s and early 1980s? What, too, will happen to interest rates?

As Stephen King, adviser to HSBC, notes in We Need to Talk About Inflation, many were too
complacent about the possibility of inflation’s return. As he notes, too, once inflation and, above
all, inflationary expectations are entrenched, they become very painful to eliminate. Have we
reached that point? Or do our institutions still have enough credibility and is enough of the
inflation still transitory for us to be able to return to low inflation at a low cost?

We are, in my view, more likely than not to return to inflation at around 2 per cent a year, or
perhaps just a little bit higher. This is also what markets expect: according to the Federal Reserve
Bank of Cleveland, US expected inflation is 2.1 per cent, almost exactly in line with the target. This
shows confidence that the target will be delivered. The inflation risk premium is also estimated at
0.5 percentage points, which is in line with historic valuations.

There are two (overlapping) arguments why this might prove too optimistic. One is that supply
conditions have become more inflationary. De-globalisation and other shocks have permanently
lowered the elasticity of supply of key inputs. That will raise the costs of keeping inflation down.
The other is that the political economy of curbing inflation has worsened. Thus, the public cares
less about inflation now, partly because it has no memory of a long period of high inflation.
Moreover, governments want to lower their indebtedness, which is now far greater than 15 years
ago, without curbing fiscal deficits. Finally, the inflation genie is now out of the bottle. Putting it
back in will hurt.

I remain unconvinced. Obviously, there is no necessary link between supply and inflation, since
demand also matters. Provided aggregate demand grows in line with potential output and the
structure of output is reasonably flexible, specific constraints are perfectly consistent with low
overall inflation. Moreover, those responsible for monetary policy will not want to go down in
history as those responsible for losing monetary stability. Last but not least, they know that it will
be far easier to crush inflation now than have to tighten yet again later. (See charts.)

Assume that this is correct. Then the inflation components in nominal interest rates will not be
permanently raised. But what about the real element? Real interest rates fell for a generation,
before reaching negative levels during the pandemic. Since then, they have recovered sharply.
What happens now?

In its latest World Economic Outlook, the IMF addresses this question by investigating the “natural
rate of interest”, which is defined as “the real interest rate that neither stimulates nor contracts the
economy”. That is also the rate at which one would expect inflation to remain stable (in the absence
of shocks). The natural rate is not directly observable. But it can be estimated. The main conclusion
of its analysis is that “once the current inflationary episode has passed, interest rates are likely to
revert towards pre-pandemic levels in advanced economies”. After the recent shocks, then, real and
nominal rates will fall back to where they were in 2019. In particular, it expects the effect of further
ageing to be modest, as is also the (opposite) effect of higher public debt.

In March, two leading macroeconomists, Olivier Blanchard and Lawrence Summers, debated this
issue in detail for the Peterson Institute for International Economics. Of the two, Blanchard came
closest to the IMF position. Summers, who had reintroduced the idea of “secular stagnation” into
the policy debate in 2015, has now changed his mind, arguing that rates will be significantly higher
than in the recent past.

The difference is not huge. Blanchard argues that real interest rates will remain below the real rate
of economic growth, which is crucial for debt sustainability. He does not suggest that they will
return to negative levels. Summers thinks they will be somewhat higher than the Fed’s estimate of
a natural rate of 0.5 per cent. One reason why real rates will be higher than before, they agree, is
higher investment in the energy transition. Another is the need to spend more on defence. Higher
public debt may also raise real rates, though inflation is eroding debt away.

These two disagree, however, on whether the persistent demand reflects temporary (Covid-related)
factors or more durable strength. They disagree on how far risk aversion will keep yields on safe
assets low. They disagree on whether ageing will raise savings further. And they disagree, too, on
the likely impact of public debt on interest rates. In all these respects, Blanchard takes a position
that justifies lower natural rates and Summers one that justifies the opposite. His position is close
to that adopted by Charles Goodhart and Manoj Pradhan.

So, assume inflation will decline to 2-3 per cent. Assume, too, an equilibrium real rate of interest of
0-2 per cent. Then nominal short rates would be 2-5 per cent and, given risk premiums, longerterm rates would be 3-6 per cent. At the lower end, debt sustainability would be simple. At the
higher end, it would be a challenge. This range of uncertainty is large. Yet reality could still be
different.
The return of inflation has changed the world. The question is how much. It is one to which time
will give its answer. My own guess is “not dramatically so”.
martin.wolf@ft.com
Follow Martin Wolf with myFT and on Twitter
Letter in response to this column:
US is textbook case of how anchoring inflation works / From Thomas R Michl, Emeritus
Professor of Economics, Colgate University, Hamilton, NY, US

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Martin Wolf
Global Economy
US inflation
US interest rates
Negative interest rates

