FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Markets Insight

The hard data signals the Fed should not cut rates
Policy setters should not be swayed by a false narrative arising from soft economic surveys

JUSTIN D'ERCOLE

Construction work on the Federal Reserve building in Washington in July © Samuel Corum/Bloomberg

Justin D’Ercole
Published SEP 3 2025

The writer is founder and chief investment officer at ISO-MTS Capital Management
Is saving more marginal jobs in the US economy now more important than maintaining inflation
fighting credibility and financial stability for all consumers? Over the past 40 years, the US Federal
Reserve has facilitated both the efficient financing of a growing government debt load and
exceptional asset price appreciation.

Now it faces a fresh dilemma. A false market narrative of economic weakness has emerged from
soft data, based on emotionally-driven surveys, that is being used to support the case for interest
rate cuts. But the hard data supports no cuts and maybe even a rise. Ultimately, this is what should
hold sway.
Current economic conditions are quite simple to assess with hard data. Our government is running
the largest non-recession deficit to GDP in its history. The economy is growing at potential. Stock
valuations are extreme. Inflation is at 3 per cent. The unemployment rate is mostly unchanged over
the past year and historically low.
Soft data such as consumer confidence surveys paints a picture of the people struggling under the
weight of high prices, high interest rates, difficulty finding jobs, and a slowing economy. While
consumers might feel like they’re struggling, the hard data indicates otherwise.
Yes, we have some recent weakening in the headline numbers for monthly increases in US nonfarm payrolls. But the Fed should be looking at the broader picture in adjusting financial
conditions. The measure of “available aggregate labour income” — the total income earned by
employees — is growing at a very strong 4-5 per cent pace. Credit card data continues to improve
with delinquencies lower year over year. Growth in personal spending in July came in at 0.5 per
cent, taking the three-month moving average back up to where it was at the beginning of the year.
Data on the trend of weekly jobless claims has contributed to the false narrative of a sluggish
labour market. However, this year’s increase in continuing claims is largely attributable to job cuts
in Washington made by the so-called Department of Government Efficiency. Initial claims are inline to lower than past years.
In fact, the breadth of the market can be seen by what is known as the Diffusion Index within the
monthly labour market report. This shows the number of industries adding jobs compared with the
number losing jobs — and an index reading above 50 signals expansion. It is now over 50 and well
above readings last year, indicating that weakness in parts of the labour market is quite narrow.

Loan growth in the economy has been mistakenly accused of being weak. Loan growth at the large
banks is significantly improved from the past few years and is currently growing above economic
potential.
The narrative about commercial real estate being in trouble and at some point likely to break, is
also fiction. Both major measures of asset quality at the banks are significantly improved with
delinquencies and net charge offs steadily improving compared with previous years across all
major segments of the economy. So-called “criticised loans”, the debt that banks think may become
non-performing, are actually falling over the past three quarters. And rising demand for
collateralised loan obligations — pools of loans that are sold to investors as securities — will lead to
more efficient refinancing of existing loans for the industry. The commercial real estate CLO
market has seen $20.6bn of issuance this year, far exceeding last year’s value of $8.5bn.
The idea that we have “room” to cut is fiction. The market has already spoken on last year’s “policy
insurance” and “risk management” cuts. The longer-term end of the US Treasuries market is 1
percentage point higher than 12 months ago. The curve of yields between shorter and longer debt
maturities is also considerably steeper, signalling investors are wanting more compensation for the
risk of holding Treasuries for more time. And the equity market is showing signs of froth.
This is not a tough and uncertain time for monetary policy. The economy is not struggling under
the cloud of uncertainty due to tariffs and supply chain adjustments. The Fed should not let the
wrong narrative influence policy decisions. A rate cut won’t help any consumer handle higher
prices and it won’t help unlock the housing market unless consumers start relying more on floating
rate mortgages again. If the Fed votes to cut its benchmark rate in September, will it be cutting
because it can or because it should? The hard data clearly supports a hold, or even a rise.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Justin D'Ercole
Markets Insight
Global Economy
US economy
US interest rates

