FT PROFESSIONAL

FirstFT World

FirstFT: Expect more US interest rate rises, economists warn
Also in today’s newsletter, Silvio Berlusconi dies, and UBS’s ‘red lines’ for Credit Suisse staff

Jay Powell will update the Federal Reserve’s interest rate predictions after this week’s meeting © Bloomberg

Gordon Smith
Published JUN 11 2023 | Updated JUN 12 2023, 06:42

The US Federal Reserve will need to take tougher action than expected to bring inflation under
control, according to a majority of leading academic economists polled by the Financial Times, who
predict at least two more quarter-point interest rate increases this year.
The latest survey, conducted in partnership with the Kent A. Clark Center for Global Markets at the
University of Chicago Booth School of Business, predicts the Fed will lift its benchmark rate to at
least 5.5 per cent this year.
Fed funds futures markets suggest investors favour just one more quarter-point rate rise in July
above the current range of between 5 per cent and 5.25 per cent, the highest level since mid-2007.

The survey results were published ahead of the Federal Reserve’s latest interest rate-setting
meeting which starts tomorrow. The US central bank is expected to pause its aggressive policy of
tightening monetary policy after 10 consecutive rate rises since March 2022 while keeping the door
opening to further tightening.
Of the 42 economists surveyed between June 5 and June 7, 67 per cent forecast the federal funds
rate to peak between 5.5 per cent and 6 per cent this year. That is up from 49 per cent in the
previous survey, which ran just days after a string of bank failures in March.
“They haven’t done enough for long enough yet to get inflation down,” said Dean Croushore, who
served as an economist at the Fed’s Philadelphia Reserve Bank for 14 years. “They are on the right
path, but the path is going to be longer and more tortuous than they ever thought.”
The latest inflation data will be released tomorrow. The annual core rate of inflation, which strips
out the cost of energy and food, rose 5.5 per cent in April.
The Federal Reserve is expected to update its interest rate expectations following the conclusion of
its two-day meeting on Wednesday.

Go deeper: Consensus on the Federal Reserve board is breaking down
about the pace at which US inflation will moderate and just how close the
economy is to a cliff edge.
Opinion: Unless the inflation data due out tomorrow shows significant
weakness, the Fed’s proposed course of action to “skip” a rise will end up as
a muddled option, rendering future decisions even more challenging,
argues Mohamed El-Erian.
Have your say: Do you think the Fed will raise interest rates once or twice
in the remainder of this year? Vote in our latest poll.
Here’s what else I’m keeping tabs on today:

Nato: Secretary-general Jens Stoltenberg visits US president Joe Biden at
the White House to discuss the military alliance’s summit in Vilnius,
Lithuania, next month, where the war in Ukraine will top the agenda.
Economic data: The US publishes its federal budget balance.
Results: Software company Oracle reports results for its fiscal fourth
quarter.

Five more top stories
1. UBS executives have drawn up a list of nearly two dozen “red lines” that prohibit
Credit Suisse staff from a range of activities, after completing the takeover of its ailing rival
earlier today. “We will never compromise on UBS’s strong culture, conservative risk approach or
quality service,” the bank’s chair and chief executive wrote in an open letter to mark the takeover.
2. Italy’s former prime minister Silvio Berlusconi, the billionaire media magnateturned trailblazing populist, has died aged 86. Berlusconi was Italy’s longest-serving
postwar prime minister in stints totalling almost a decade that were marked by criminal
investigations into his business affairs and sex scandals. Read more on the politician who provided
a template for today’s populists.
3. EU funds managed by Odey Asset Management are discussing restrictions on
investors’ withdrawals as part of emergency measures to contain the fallout of sexual
misconduct allegations against the hedge fund manager’s founder revealed in an FT investigation.
Read the full story.
4. Ukraine claimed to have breached Russia’s defences and freed at least three
villages yesterday in the south of the Donetsk region. The day before, President Volodymyr
Zelenskyy had confirmed that Kyiv’s long-awaited counter-offensive was finally under way, with
the aim to liberate some 18 per cent of occupied territory in south-eastern regions.

5. Donald Trump’s allies rallied to his defence before the former president
surrenders to authorities on criminal charges. The former president is expected to plead
not guilty tomorrow in Miami to 37 criminal counts in connection with his alleged possession of
sensitive material after departing the White House in 2021. Not all Republicans came to the former
president’s defence though. Read more

The Big Read

© FT montage; Dreamstime

Around the world, developers of renewable energy infrastructure are being told they must wait
anything from a couple of years to up to 15 years before they can plug projects into grids that are
struggling to keep pace with shifts in electricity generation. There is a dawning realisation that
these connection delays could have a calamitous impact on global efforts to cut greenhouse gas
emissions.

We’re also reading . . .
Argentina: The increasingly desperate government in Buenos Aires is
going cap in hand to both China and the IMF as it tries to stave off a
currency crisis.
Masters in Finance 2023: The FT’s annual rankings of finance masters
courses were published yesterday and French business schools dominated
the list.
Rana Foroohar: Last month, a big insurance company said it would stop
selling California homeowners coverage because of wildfire risk. Other
states are not far behind, Rana argues, because of climate change. What
happens when America becomes uninsurable, she asks.

Chart of the day
Big pharma faces revenue shock from patent cliff
Sales in $bn
Total sales at risk

Percentage of sales at risk

100

80

60

40

20

0

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2027

2028

Source: EY analysis
FT Graphic

Pharmaceutical and biotech companies spent $85bn on acquisitions in the first five months of the
year, marking a dramatic recovery in dealmaking as they seek to replenish their drug pipelines. The
surge in M&A compared with just $35.6bn in deals in the same period of 2022, according to Stifel,
an investment bank. Read more

Take a break from the news
Former French president François Hollande sat down recently with FT editor Roula Khalaf to
discuss French politics, the war in Ukraine and dealing with the Kremlin. “Putin cannot be
seduced,” Hollande said. “He respects force.”

© James Ferguson

Additional contributions by Tee Zhuo and Benjamin Wilhelm

Recommended newsletters for you
Asset Management — Find out the inside story of the movers and shakers behind a
multitrillion-dollar industry. Sign up here
The Week Ahead — Start every week with a preview of what’s on the agenda. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
World
Companies

FirstFT
Gordon Smith

