FT PROFESSIONAL

Disrupted Times Covid-19

Inflation concerns intensify as cost of energy soars
Rising natural gas prices have helped push eurozone inflation to 13-year high

Inflation is heating up on the back of the UK and EU’s natural gas crunch © Matthew Brown/AP

Mark Wembridge
Published OCT 1 2021

This article is an on-site version of our The Road to Recovery newsletter. Sign up here to get the
newsletter sent straight to your inbox three times a week

Good evening from chilly Cambridge, where autumn has kicked in and soaring gas prices have
consumers considering when (and how high) to switch on their central heating.
The UK and Europe’s natural gas crunch is poised to intensify after Beijing ordered Chinese statebacked companies to secure their energy supplies at any cost.

Energy prices were also a factor in eurozone inflation hitting 3.4 per cent in September — the
highest for 13 years — piling pressure on the European Central Bank to scale back its monetary
stimulus. Germany’s inflation hit 4.1 per cent in September — its highest level for 29 years.

Yet surging gas prices will soon reverse course, according to Mike Fulwood, a senior research
fellow at the Oxford Institute for Energy Studies, who argues that it would require a longer and
colder winter than last year to see prices sustained above current levels.
Meanwhile, the price of Brent crude oil touched $80 per barrel this week for the first time in three
years and the UK’s panic buying of petrol has led to fears of the country running out of fuel.

Latest news
US Covid-19 cases and hospitalisations eased in September — a potentially
encouraging trend heading into the colder months

A key US inflation measure remained at its highest level in about three
decades, while consumer spending rebounded last month
Australia will allow vaccinated citizens to quarantine at home from as early
as November, marking the first big relaxation of its border restrictions
For up-to-the-minute coronavirus updates, visit our live blog

Need to know: the economy
US Congressional Democrats have delayed a make-or-break vote on Joe Biden’s flagship $1.3tn
infrastructure package, dealing a blow to the White House as divisions within the president’s
party threaten to torpedo his legislative agenda. Biden’s $3.5tn social safety net and climate
change bill also remains in doubt because a group of moderate Democrats object to its size and
some key details.
The dollar touched a 12-month high against major currencies as traders bet that persistent
inflation would drive the US Federal Reserve closer to its first pandemic-era interest rate rise.

Latest for the UK and Europe
The seasonal gloom is expected to deteriorate further with British business leaders warning that
the UK is facing an “autumn storm” of rising taxes, escalating costs, labour shortages and supply
disruption, as the UK government’s Covid-19 support schemes end.
While the UK’s economy grew faster than projected in the second quarter, with GDP rising 5.5
per cent in the second quarter after an initial estimate of 4.8 per cent, the supply chain is
hamstrung by a lack of lorry drivers.
In response, supermarkets and big retailers are offering salary rises and “golden hello”
payments to drivers, making it increasingly tough for hauliers and food suppliers to cling on to
staff.

The driver shortage knocked nearly one-fifth off shares in AO World on Friday after the
electronics retailer said supply chain disruptions were holding it back.
Sign up here for our Trade Secrets newsletter and keep up to speed on international trade and
globalisation

Global latest
The Financial Times has waved a sad goodbye to Philip Stephens, whose final column reflects on
how global policymakers’ challenges have evolved over the past quarter of a century. When his
column first appeared in the FT, “the world belonged to liberalism”, he writes. Now, western
democracies are threatened by a lack of public trust.
Vietnam has abandoned its zero-Covid strategy after lockdown led to a record drop in GDP,
while both Mexico and Colombia have raised interest rates in a bid to calm inflation.

Need to know: business
Capital markets have never been so hot, with companies across the globe tapping investors for
more than $1tn worth of share sales and nearly $4tn of bond issuance.
On the subject of bonds, distressed debt funds have flocked to bonds issued by Evergrande,
betting that Beijing will rescue the Chinese property developer to avoid fears of contagion in the
real estate market and the global financial system.

If Evergrande’s executives are keen to drown their sorrows, their custom may be appreciated at JD
Wetherspoon, which reported a record annual loss of £154.7m. Tim Martin, founder and chair of
the pub chain, has blamed the loss on lockdowns and called the UK government’s Covid-19
measures “draconian”.

Science round up
Drugmaker Merck said it would ask US regulators to authorise the first antiviral pill to treat
Covid-19 after a late-stage clinical trial showed that the drug cut the risk of hospitalisation or death
in half. If the US Food and Drug Administration authorises the drug called Molnupiravir, it
would be the first treatment of its kind, a twice-daily pill prescribed for five days to patients who
have recently been diagnosed with Covid-19.
The hole in the ozone layer this year has widened to among the largest on record, according to
data from EU observation programme Copernicus. The hole above Antarctica stretched across 24m
square kilometres in September, rivalling the 27m sq km recorded in 2006.

The Covid-19 pandemic has triggered the largest fall in life expectancy since the second world war
in most developed nations, with American men suffering the most severely. Research found
that 27 of 29 countries, spanning most of Europe, the US and Chile, experienced reductions in
life expectancy in 2020 at a scale that wiped out years of progress on mortality.

Covid cases and vaccinations
Total global cases: 234.7m

Total doses given: 6.25bn

Get the latest worldwide picture with our vaccine tracker

And finally . . . some hot stuff
A dramatic volcanic eruption on La Palma, one of the Canary Islands off the coast of northwest Africa, is attracting “lava chasers”. While volcanoes are a thrilling (and potentially dangerous)
draw, whether they should become a tourist attraction is being hotly debated.

Debate has, err, erupted over the growing phenomenon of volcano tourism © Nacho Doce/Reuters

Recommended newsletters
Europe Express — Your essential guide to what matters in Europe today. Sign up here
FT Asset Management — The inside story on the movers and shakers behind a multitrillion
dollar industry. Sign up here

Thanks very much for reading The Road to Recovery. We’d love it if you shared this newsletter
with friends and colleagues who might find it valuable, so please do forward it. And if this was
forwarded to you, you are very welcome to sign up and enjoy it — and access to all of the FT —
free for 30 days. Please sign up here.
Please also share your feedback with us at roadtorecovery@ft.com. Thank you

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Eurozone inflation
Energy sector
UK inflation
Covid-19
Disrupted Times

