FT PROFESSIONAL

The Big Read Central banks

The inflation fight: are central banks
going too far, too fast?
With sharp rises in interest rates and currency
interventions, central bankers insist they will
vanquish inflation, whatever the cost

© Rory Griffiths/FT montage/Getty Images | Christine Lagarde, Jay Powell and Haruhiko Kuroda

Chris Giles and Valentina Romei
Published SEP 23 2022

With their bills sharpened and talons on display, the world’s central banks fully adopted the
posture of the hawk this week. Backed by sharp rises in interest rates and currency intervention,
they have used pointed language to advertise their singular aim of defeating the scourge of
inflation.
In one of the most sudden shifts in global economic policymaking in decades, central bankers say
they have had enough of rapid price rises and insist they are prepared to act to restore price
stability, almost at any cost.
But after a week of dramatic announcements from central banks around the world, at least some
economists are beginning to ask — are they going too far, too fast?

The US Federal Reserve has been by far the most important actor in this shift of temperament. On
Wednesday, it raised its main interest rate by 0.75 percentage points to a range between 3 and 3.25
per cent. At the start of the year, this rate had been close to zero.

By raising interest rates, central bankers are not seeking to lower the peak rates of inflation caused by soaring gas and food prices,
but are aiming to ensure inflation does not remain high © Kiyoshi Ota/Bloomberg

The Fed signalled that this was far from the end of its monetary policy tightening, with members of
its interest rate-setting committee predicting rates would end 2022 between 4.25 and 4.5 per cent
— the highest since the 2008-09 financial crisis.
In the summer, Fed chair Jay Powell talked about higher borrowing costs ending with a “soft
landing” for the economy without a recession and a gentle glide down in inflation rates. On
Wednesday, he admitted that was unlikely. “We have got to get inflation behind us. I wish there
were a painless way to do that,” Powell said.

The Fed’s plan to curtail consumer and business spending in a bid to reduce domestic inflation has
been replicated elsewhere, even if the causes of high inflation are different. In Europe, the
extraordinary prices of natural gas have sent headline rates of inflation to similar levels as in the
US, but core inflation is significantly lower. In emerging economies, declining currency values
against the US dollar, which hit a 20-year high this week, have driven import prices higher.

Policy rates are rising in advanced economies …
Policy rates at the end of the year, %, countries ranked by policy rate
2020

2021

US

New Zealand

Canada

Singapore

Australia

S Korea

UK

Malaysia

Eurozone

China

2022 (forecast)

2023 (forecast)

1/2

 

Thailand

Switzerland

Japan
-1

0

1

2

Source: UBS • 2022 and 2023 are UBS foreca

The Swedish Riksbank kicked off the copycat action on Tuesday with a 1 percentage point increase
in its interest rate to 1.75 per cent, its biggest interest rate rise in three decades. Switzerland, Saudi
Arabia and the UAE also announced a 0.75 percentage point increase each, which for Switzerland
meant ending the period of negative rates that started in 2015. The Bank of England on Thursday
raised its main rate by 0.5 percentage points to 2.25 per cent, the highest since the financial crisis,
with a near promise of further rate rises to come.
Even in Japan, which has long adopted negative interest rates, the authorities felt the need to act to
tame inflation. Its finance ministry intervened in currency markets to prop up the yen on Thursday
and limit the rise in import prices. It took what it called “decisive action” to address US dollar
strength that was pushing the country’s underlying inflation rate to a highly unusual 2.8 per cent
rate in August.
Economists at Deutsche Bank noted that for every one central bank around the world that is
currently cutting interest rates, there are now 25 banks that are raising rates — a ratio that is way
above normal levels and has not been seen since the late 1990s, when many central banks were
given independence to set monetary policy.

Nathan Sheets, global head of international economics at Citi and a former US Treasury official,
says central banks are “moving so rapidly that as they put these rate hikes in place, there really
hasn’t been enough time for them to judge what the feedback effects are on the economy”.
Central bankers have been reluctant to admit they made errors in keeping interest rates too low for
too long, pointing out that these assessments are much easier to make with the benefit of hindsight
than in real time. But they now want to take action to demonstrate that even if they were tardy in
beginning to take action against inflation, they will be sufficiently “forceful”, to use the Bank of
England’s word, to bring inflation down.
Powell was clear that the US central bank would not fail on the job. “We will keep at it until we’re
confident the job is done,” he said on Wednesday. Sweden’s Riksbank was characteristically blunt
in its assessment. “Inflation is too high,” it said. “Monetary policy now needs to be tightened
further to bring inflation back to the target.”

The new stance on monetary policy has been developing through 2022 as the inflation problem
became more persistent and difficult for central bankers. By the time many gathered at Jackson
Hole in August for their premier annual conference, the mood had shifted decisively towards the
greater action that is now being played out around the world.

Jackson Hole: the New York Federal Reserve’s John Williams with Fed governor Lael Brainard and chair Jay Powell, who said: ‘We
have got to get inflation behind us. I wish there were a painless way to do that’ © Jim Urquhart/Reuters

Christian Keller, head of economics research at Barclays Investment Bank, says that “since Jackson
Hole, central bankers have decided that they want to err on the side of hawkishness”.
“For the first time in perhaps decades they have become afraid of losing control of the [inflation]
process,” says Keller, highlighting how central bankers now say they want to avoid the mistakes of
the 1970s. Central banks “are taking decisions that come with much risk and this feels better if
everyone else is doing it. The result is a synchronised tightening.”
With the new attitude, markets are pricing that by June next year policy rates will rise to 4.6 per
cent in the US, 2.9 per cent in the eurozone and 5.3 per cent in the UK — projections that are
between 1.5 and 2 percentage points higher than at the start of August.

By raising interest rates, central bankers are not seeking to lower the peak rates of inflation that
have been caused outside the US by soaring gas and food prices, but they are aiming to ensure
inflation does not stick at a rate that is uncomfortably higher than their targets. This could happen
if companies and employees begin to expect higher inflation, leading to price rises and demands for
higher wages.
They are willing to ensure that there is pain in terms of an economic downturn to demonstrate
their credibility in hitting their inflation targets.
Sheets says that, having misread inflation last year, central banks would rather overdo it now. They
are balancing the prospects of a recession against the risk of a sustained inflationary episode that
would undermine their credibility. “On balance they feel . . . that is a risk they have to take.”
An added complication is the models that central banks use — which did not foresee such rapid
price rises as the pandemic eased and the war in Ukraine began — are no longer working well in
describing economic events.

A Ukrainian cannon fires at Russian troops. The models central banks use — which did not foresee such rapid price rises as the
pandemic eased and the war in Ukraine began — are no longer working well in describing economic events © Ihor
Tkachov/AFP/Getty Images

Ellie Henderson, economist at Investec, worries that “the usual tools and models, which would
typically guide such [central bank] analysis, can no longer be relied upon as they are now operating
in parameters outside ranges of which they were estimated”.
In this uncharted world, Jennifer McKeown, head of global economics at Capital Economics,
believes it is difficult to argue that central banks are going too far.
“While this is the most aggressive tightening cycle for many years, it is also true that inflation is
higher than it has been for decades,” she says. “Inflation expectations have risen and labour
markets are tight, so central banks are rightly concerned about the potential for second-round
effects from energy prices to wages and underlying inflation.”
But an increasing number of economists, led by some big names such as Maurice Obstfeld, former
chief economist of the IMF, think central banks are now being excessive in their actions to raise
interest rates and that the effect of all this tightening will be a global recession. The World Bank
also expressed similar concerns this week.

Antoine Bouvet, an economist at ING, says that “central banks have lost faith in their ability to
forecast inflation accurately”, which has led them to focus more on today’s actual rates of inflation.

Women work in an office in Bond Street, London, during the power cuts of 1973-74. Central bankers now say they want to avoid the
mistakes of the 1970s © Evening Standard/Getty Images

“Combine this with the fact that they seem to think that the cost of overshooting in their policy
tightening is lower than undershooting and you have a recipe for over-tightening,” he explains. “I
would characterise this policy choice as almost overshooting by design.”
According to Holger Schmieding, chief economist at investment bank Berenberg, “monetary policy
works with a lag, [so] the risk is that the Fed will notice only belatedly that it has gone too far if it
now raises rates well beyond 4 per cent”, resulting in unnecessarily long and deep recessions.
But as many economists explain, no one really knows what is too far and not far enough in this
environment. Central banks therefore want to ensure they eradicate inflation, allowing them to
correct course and lower interest rates later if necessary.
Krishna Guha, vice-chair at Evercore ISI, says there is a “serious risk” that central banks are
overdoing the tightening, but he contends the Fed is right to err in the direction of doing too much.

“At the global level, as well as at the US level, it is probably better to overdo it than underdo it and
risk a 1970s redux,” says Guha. “But that of course only makes the outcome of overdoing it more
likely.”
Letter in response to this article:
Inflation debate — what goes around comes around / From William McClain, Rockville, MD, US

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global inflation
US interest rates
Central banks
Federal Reserve
The Big Read

