FT PROFESSIONAL

The Week Ahead Global Economy

Fed chair Powell to fight his corner at Jackson Hole
Bankers gather in Wyoming, European heads fly to Washington for vital Ukraine war peace talks, big box
retailers report

From left, US Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell, Bank of Canada governor Tiff Macklem and Bank of England head Andrew Bailey at
last year’s Jackson Hole gathering © AP

Jonathan Moules
Published AUG 17 2025

This article is an on-site version of our The Week Ahead newsletter. Subscribers can sign up here
to get the newsletter delivered every Sunday. Explore all of our newsletters here

Hello and welcome to the working week.

August in the northern hemisphere is a month for escaping the office grind, and the politics, by
spending some time in nature. Some of the world’s most important central bankers will be doing
just that later this week in the wide open spaces of Wyoming, where the annual Jackson Hole
economic policy symposium takes place.
But this will be a works outing, not a holiday, especially for the US Federal Reserve chair Jay
Powell. He and other Fed officials will arrive at the Jackson Lake Lodge in Grand Teton National
Park on Wednesday with intrigue swirling as to who will become the next head of the US central
bank. If you are interested (and a premium subscriber), my colleague Robin Wigglesworth on
Alphaville has penned an assessment of the runners and riders.
Aside from the political manoeuvring, Powell’s biggest challenge in what will almost definitely be
his last appearance at the Jackson Hole gathering is going to be conveying a relatively clear
monetary policy outlook message, given the splits in the Federal Open Market Committee on the
next interest rate move. We’ll get some more clarity on that last issue when the minutes from the
last FOMC meeting are published on Wednesday.
Powell will no doubt be glad that he will be joined in Jackson Hole by Bank of England governor
Andrew Bailey — who has already voiced his support for the Fed chair — as well as his Canadian
counterpart Tiff Macklem. Powell will no doubt be relieved also that Stephen Miran, the man US
President Donald Trump has chosen to temporarily fill the FOMC seat vacated by Adriana Kugler’s
abrupt departure, will not be travelling to Jackson Hole. However, the shadow of Trump will loom
large over proceedings.
Politics this week begins, and possibly ends, with vital Ukraine peace talks at the White House in
Washington, where the country’s President Volodymyr Zelenskyy will on Monday convene with
British Prime Minister Sir Keir Starmer alongside a “coalition of the willing” of EU leaders. To get
up to speed with Russian President Vladimir Putin’s demands, read this.
The latest, and remarkably good, Wall Street earnings run is slowing down to a jog. But the coming
days will see a flurry of reports from “big box” US retailers, including Walmart, Home Depot
and Target. Two key questions are being asked about this sector: how is the US consumer holding
up? And what will be the effect of higher tariffs on consumer prices?

The national economic data for US consumer confidence is not good, showing tepid spending
online and on Main Street this year. Shoppers feel “broadly negative” about the US economy,
according to the University of Michigan’s closely watched survey. However, the situation is
complex as my colleague, the FT’s consumer editor, Gregory Meyer found on a recent trip to
Cincinnati, where shoppers were displaying a surprising bullishness.
The main theme from the broader economic data run this week will be inflation, with updates due
from Canada, the EU, Germany, Japan and the UK. The latter will just give an update on the
consumer price index inflation figure, however, as the producer price index measure was cancelled
by the Office for National Statistics in March. More details on these and other items below.

One more thing . . .
The last of the annual tennis grand slams, the US Open, gets under way in the late summer heat of
Flushing Meadows, New York, this week. But if you are one of the growing army of padel
enthusiasts, you should read FT columnist Jemima Kelly’s take on the sport and the way it showed
her the physical and mental benefit of taking up new playful activities, something I wholeheartedly
endorse.
How are you spending your free time this month? Email me at jonathan.moules@ft.com or, if you
are reading this from your inbox, hit reply. Have a good week.

Key economic and company reports
Here is a more complete list of what to expect in terms of company reports and economic data this
week.

Monday
James Wroath becomes the new Keller Group CEO, succeeding Michael
Speakman

Kirk Tanner becomes president and CEO of Hershey, succeeding Michele
Buck
EU: June/Q2 business registrations and bankruptcies data
Germany: June building permits data
UK: card spending statistics from UK Finance. Also, the monthly
Rightmove House Price Index
Results: Lendlease FY, Palo Alto Networks Q4

Tuesday
Canada: July consumer price index (CPI) inflation rate data
Germany: June manufacturing index
UK: July insolvency figures
US: July state employment figures
Results: BHP FY, Coloplast 9M, CSL FY, Home Depot Q2,
International Workplace Group HY, James Hardie Industries Q1
(Wednesday AM local time in Australia), Keysight Technologies Q3,
Medtronic Q1, Woodside Energy HY

Wednesday
Reserve Bank of Australia assistant governor (business services)
Michelle McPhee and assistant governor (financial system) Brad Jones take
part in an online panel discussion at The Future of Money webinar

Raphael Bostic, president and chief executive of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Atlanta, takes part in a moderated conversation at Fintech South
2025 about monetary policy and an economy that works for everyone
China: interest rate announcement
EU: July harmonised index of consumer prices (HICP) inflation rate data
France: Q2 new home sales
Germany: July industrial products producer price index (PPI) inflation rate
data
Indonesia: interest rate announcement
Israel: interest rate announcement
New Zealand: interest rate announcement
Sweden: interest rate announcement
UK: July CPI inflation rate data
US: minutes from July 29-30 rate-setting meeting published
Results: Alcon Q2, Analog Devices Q3, APA FY, Costain HY, Estée
Lauder Q4, Geberit HY, Ithaca Energy HY, Jack Henry &
Associates Q4, Kenmare Resources HY, Lion Finance Q2/HY,
Lowe’s Q2, OSB HY, Target Q2, TJX Q2

Thursday
Australia: July labour force data

Eurozone, France, Germany, India, Japan, UK, US: S&P Global/HCOB
purchasing managers’ index (PMI) data
Norway: Q2 GDP estimate
South Korea: July PPI inflation rate data
UK: July public sector finances data. Also, monthly CBI Industrial Trends
Survey.
Results: Aegon HY, AIA HY, Goodman FY, Hays FY trading update,
Intuit Q4/FY, Nordson Q3, Novonesis HY, Ross Stores Q2,
Walmart Q2, Workday Q2, Zoom Q2

Friday
Germany: Q2 GDP estimate
Japan: July CPI inflation rate data
UK: July Great Britain retail sales figures plus GfK’s consumer confidence
survey
Results: Cathay Financial Holding Q2

World events
Finally, here is a rundown of other events and milestones this week.

Monday
Financial Times Business Book of the Year longlist announced

UK: High Pay Centre publishes annual survey of FTSE 100 CEO pay
packages, analysing the pay of senior executives of British publicly quoted
companies and comparing the median CEO pay with the median earnings
of a UK full-time worker
US: European leaders including German Chancellor Friedrich Merz, UK
Prime Minister Sir Keir Starmer, French President Emmanuel Macron,
Italian premier Giorgia Meloni, Finnish President Alexander Stubb and
European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen will join President
Volodymyr Zelenskyy in a vital White House meeting with US President
Donald Trump on Ukraine war peace talks.

Tuesday
Italy: anniversary of the superyacht Bayesian sinking off the coast of Sicily
during bad weather, resulting in the deaths of seven of the 22 people
onboard, including British tech tycoon Mike Lynch and his 18-year-old
daughter Hannah
US: 145th US Open Mixed Doubles Championship opens on the tennis
courts of Flushing Meadows, New York. The men’s and women’s singles
contests, the last grand slam tournaments of the year, begin on Sunday

Wednesday
UK: James Harding, co-founder of Tortoise Media, editor-in-chief of The
Observer and former FT Washington bureau chief, delivers the 50th James
MacTaggart Memorial Lecture, the Edinburgh TV Festival’s keynote speech

Thursday
UK: quarterly and annual immigration statistics published, covering people
coming to Britain, extending their stay, gaining citizenship, applying for
asylum and being detained or being removed. Also, GCSE results day for
schools in England, Wales and Northern Ireland for exams taking young
people to the next stage of secondary education
US: The three-day Jackson Hole economic policy symposium begins in
Wyoming, attended by central bankers, finance ministers, academics and
executives from the financial sector. The annual event, hosted by the
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, is this year called Labor Markets in
Transition: Demographics, Productivity, and Macroeconomic Policy

Friday
Russia: National flag day
South Korea: People Power party to decide a new leader from a shortlist of
four at its national convention. The embattled conservative party’s support
has plummeted after disgraced former PPP president Yoon Suk Yeol was
removed from office
UK: Silverstone Festival, an annual three-day motorsport and music festival
held over the bank holiday weekend, begins at the Northamptonshire
racetrack. This year’s event celebrates 75 years of Formula 1 racing

Saturday
International Day for the Remembrance of the Slave Trade and its Abolition

Japan: South Korean President Lee Jae Myung begins a two-day state visit,
where he will hold a summit with Prime Minister Shigeru Ishiba
Taiwan: parliamentary recall elections
US: Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey speaks at Jackson Hole
economic policy symposium

Sunday
Australia: World Solar Challenge, 1,860-mile contest in which competitors
drive solar-powered and electric concept vehicles they designed and built
themselves from Darwin to Adelaide
UK: London’s Notting Hill Carnival, celebrating Caribbean culture, begins
with families and children’s day
Ukraine: Independence Day public holiday

Recommended newsletters for you
White House Watch — What Trump’s second term means for Washington, business and the
world. Sign up here
FT Opinion — Insights and judgments from top commentators. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
The Week Ahead

Jonathan Moules

