FT PROFESSIONAL

US inflation

Investors expect higher rates to persist after hawkish Jay Powell ends hope of Fed pivot
US central bank chair sparks sell-off by vowing ‘unconditional’ commitment to quashing decades-high
inflation

Jay Powell used his speech at the Jackson Hole symposium in Wyoming to stress that the Federal Reserve ‘must keep at it until the
job is done’ on inflation © Jim Urquhart/Reuters

Colby Smith in Jackson Hole, Wyoming and Eric Platt in New York
Published AUG 27 2022

Investors are preparing for a longer period of high interest rates than expected after the US central
bank chair delivered his most hawkish speech to date, vowing to ensure elevated prices do not
become entrenched.
Jay Powell on Friday put an end to any hopes that the Federal Reserve would step back from its
dramatic tightening of monetary policy anytime soon, as he reaffirmed his “unconditional”
commitment to tackling high inflation.

“The theory of a dovish pivot has been squashed,” said Brian Kennedy, a portfolio manager with
Loomis Sayles. “Powell is a creature of history and to me this is further confirmation that the Fed
does not believe inflation is rolling over and going back to 2 per cent.”
The eight-minute speech sparked a dramatic stock sell-off with the benchmark S&P 500 sliding
more than 3 per cent — its biggest drawdown since the June rout, when $14tn in value was erased
from the US stock market. Hopes that the Fed may relax its stance as the economy slows were
shattered. All but six of the companies within the stock benchmark dropped, with shares of
economically sensitive homebuilders falling nearly 5 per cent and chipmakers declining more than
6 per cent.

Traders in futures markets shifted their bets as well. While they still expect the Fed to lift rates to
between 3.75 and 4 per cent in the first half of next year, they began to dial back their wagers that
the central bank would begin to start cutting rates later that year and into 2024 as they previously
bet.

“It could not be clearer that they are going to keep raising rates and running down the balance
sheet until they get clearly on top of inflation,” said Bob Michele, the head of JPMorgan Asset
Management’s global fixed income, currency and commodities unit. “This fantasy that they will
start cutting rates a couple months after the last rate hike is nonsense.”
Michele added the fact that futures and Treasury markets did not react more forcefully to Powell’s
speech underscored the credibility problem the Fed chair still faced. Powell and his colleagues have
run into criticism for arguing last year that inflation would prove transitory and ultimately fall back
towards the Fed’s 2 per cent target.
The more muted move in Treasuries could also reflect the brutal sell-off they have already faced
this year, money managers said, with the yield on the two-year note trading just below a 14-year
high struck in June.

The market ructions followed Powell’s long-awaited speech at the first in-person Jackson Hole
symposium of global central bankers since the start of the pandemic, in which he stressed the Fed
“must keep at it until the job is done” on inflation. He also acknowledged that tackling inflation will
probably have economic costs, including a “sustained period of below-trend growth”.
“While higher interest rates, slower growth, and softer labour market conditions will bring down
inflation, they will also bring some pain to households and businesses,” he said. “These are the
unfortunate costs of reducing inflation. But a failure to restore price stability would mean far
greater pain.”
Citing the tumult of the 1970s — in which the Fed made errors by easing policy prematurely in
order to shore up growth but before inflation had moderated sufficiently — Powell vowed to avoid
that outcome. He also reiterated that rates will need to stay at a level that restrains growth “for
some time” and emphasised the high bar in terms of the economic data to justify shifting to a lessaggressive stance.
Julian Richers, an economist with Morgan Stanley, said Powell’s speech helped dispel the view the
Fed might be swayed to loosen policy as the economy slows. Powell’s comments following the Fed’s
July meeting helped propel a relief rally.

“This whole debate of a Fed pivot in July never really made sense,” he said. “If you were hanging
your hat on the Fed being uber-dovish, that’s a course correction.”
Fed officials have yet to decide whether a third consecutive 0.75 percentage point rate rise is
necessary at the next policy meeting in September or if they can begin shifting away from the
“front-loading” phase of the tightening cycle and scale back to a half-point rate rise. In just four
months, the federal funds rate has increased from near-zero to a target range of 2.25 per cent to
2.50 per cent.
Economists believe further rate rises will be necessary in 2023 in order to quell inflation, which
they warn is at significant risk of persisting longer than anticipated.
Most have pencilled in a recession at some point in the next 12 months, with the unemployment
rate rising well beyond its historically low level of 3.5 per cent.
“The great unknown is how much the economy actually will slow in the near-term and at what
point does the Fed acknowledge that,” Loomis Sayles’ Kennedy said.

Are we heading towards a global recession? Our economics editor Chris Giles and US economics
editor Colby Smith discussed this and how different countries are likely to react in our latest IG
Live. Watch it here.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US inflation
US interest rates
Central banks
Federal Reserve
US

