FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion The FT View

The Federal Reserve deftly changes tack
Hawkish tilt is justified given an encouraging but uncertain outlook

THE EDITORIAL BOARD

Fed chair Jay Powell has already demonstrated his ability for fancy footwork © Joshua Roberts/Reuters

The editorial board
Published JUN 18 2021

The Federal Reserve has begun tiptoeing away from the extraordinary measures it adopted to help
the US cope with the coronavirus pandemic. For the moment this does not consist of any big leaps
— in its meeting this week it did not change its policy rate nor “taper” the pace at which it
purchases assets through its quantitative easing schemes — but of changing how the central bank
communicates its intentions. The Fed is right to tread carefully: there is still a lot of uncertainty
about the outlook.

Chair Jay Powell noted in the press conference on Wednesday, following the meeting, that the
prognosis for the US economy was better than the Fed had previously forecast. Vaccinations, policy
support and the reopening of businesses all meant that growth, employment and inflation were
higher than the central bank had expected. “There’s every reason to think that we’ll be in a labour
market with very attractive numbers,” Powell said.
The rise in inflation, however, is a concern for the central bank. The speed at which prices have
risen has surprised the policy committee — the central bank was forced to revise up its forecast for
core inflation, which strips out volatile food and energy prices, to 3 per cent this year from 2.2 per
cent at its March meeting. “Bottlenecks” from the reopening of the US economy had been larger
than expected, the Fed said, although it still expects these effects to be “transitory”, with core
inflation falling to 2.1 per cent in 2021.
Nevertheless, this faster than expected inflation has contributed to a more hawkish tilt to
communications, albeit in the context of a very dovish set of policies — the central bank kept its
interest rate target at 0 to 0.25 per cent and rate of asset purchases at $120bn a month. Investors
should think about this meeting as “the talking about talking about tapering meeting, I guess”, in
the words of Powell. Such indications that the central bank was beginning to think about reducing
its asset purchases was enough, along with an update to the central bank’s forecasts of interest
rates to lift yields on US treasuries as well as the dollar.
The Fed has deftly handled this shift. Investors and the central bank have largely converged on the
same point — market-based estimates of inflation have plateaued after rising at the start of the year
while expectations of an interest rate rise in 2022 have faded. The central bank has demonstrated
that it can, under its new framework, respond to better than expected data and signal rising
interest rates without destabilising markets.

This will be vital. There is considerable uncertainty about the outlook. As Powell noted, while the
labour market is recovering, the long-term effect of the pandemic has not become entirely clear.
The unemployment rate may have halved in the past year but many American workers have
dropped out of the labour market entirely. With time, and supportive monetary policy, they may
come back. Or, of greater concern, it may be that the “full employment” the Fed is aiming for may
already be far closer than it thinks and keeping policy loose will only contribute to inflationary
pressure.
Other cost pressures, too, may be far less transitory than the Fed currently expects. Lumber prices
may have fallen from the spike they reached earlier this year off the back of a construction and DIY
boom but they are still up compared with the post-financial crisis norm. Meanwhile, commodity
traders, for their part, are forecasting that oil could reach $100 a barrel. Powell has already
demonstrated his ability for fancy footwork. That is encouraging: he is likely to need it again.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
The editorial board
The FT View
US inflation
US interest rates
Central banks

