FT PROFESSIONAL

Unhedged Markets

Higher yields threaten the equity rally
The rise in long Treasury rates is not just a soft landing story

© FT montage/Bloomberg

Robert Armstrong and Ethan Wu
Published AUG 3 2023

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
This article is an on-site version of our Unhedged newsletter. Sign up here to get the newsletter
sent straight to your inbox every weekday

Good morning. The initial plan today had been to reflect on Fitch’s downgrade of US debt, but we
could find no reason to dissent from the consensus view of the rating agency’s view: that the report
is both irrelevant to the bond market and very oddly timed. So we skipped it. We’re more
interested in what Apple and Amazon results — both of which come today — have to say about the
US economy. Email us: robert.armstrong@ft.com and ethan.wu@ft.com.

Long bonds and equities
Long Treasury yields are approaching the highs that they hit back in the autumn of last year, in
both nominal and inflation-adjusted terms:

This fact has not attracted much comment, perhaps because of the cheery mood in markets
generally and because there is plenty of other news. Still, I think it’s a big deal and demands some
reflection, not least among equity investors, who have (at least until yesterday) been enjoying a
stonking 2023 rally. Bond yields and stock valuations do not (as is often assumed) have a regular
relationship through time, but there is some reason to think that, at the current moment, rising
yields and the hot stock market are in tension.
It is odd, from one simple point of view, that long yields should rise just as worries about inflation
are falling away. While inflation and Federal Reserve policy are most tightly linked with short
rates, long rates are just the sum of expected short rates through time, plus a term premium. The
term premium is currently negative. So recent evidence of disinflation should, all else being equal,
tamp down long yields, because short yields are likely to have peaked.
This was the basic thinking behind our newsletter of a few weeks ago arguing that owning logdated bonds was becoming more appealing:

The 10-year Treasury yield has not moved much since the autumn of last
year, but the inflation situation is both clearer and more benign. Rates
volatility appears to be easing off. If we are on the way back to normal after a
bout of supply-shock inflation, then locking in a 3.8 per cent yield for 10
years — when pre-pandemic long yields were quite consistently below 3 —
seems like a logical bet.
Well, 10-year yields are nearly 4.1 per cent now, and the inflation outlook is the same, so that story
should be even more compelling now.
But inflation is only half the story, of course. The news about growth has been good, too. This
means implied probabilities of recession are down, which should reduce the appeal of risk-free
Treasuries, and push yields up. Our excellent colleague Kate Duguid points out that the biggest
recent daily move up in long yields came on July 27, the day of the ebullient report on US GDP in
the second quarter.

The growth-based story fits with the recent negative correlation between bond prices and equity
prices. Stocks have risen alongside yields in recent weeks, as they often do when growth is solid
and inflation fears are under control. But high yields are not only a reflection of good growth
prospects. I asked Bob Michele, chief investment officer at JPMorgan Asset Management, what he
made of the recent move up in long bonds. His reply:

The market is pricing in a Fed that will remain restrictive for a long period of
time.
We prefer to look at yields in real terms. While 10-year real rates have risen
to cycle highs, it is because front-end real yields (most often associated with
policy stance) have continued to move higher. In fact, 5-year real yield 5-year
forward [that is, the implied 5-year real interest rate five years from now] are
within the range they traded since December, while 2-year and 5-year real
rates are at or above the cycle highs (3% and 2%, respectively).
It remains to be seen how well the economy can handle such restrictive
policy rates. We see 10-year yields at these levels reflecting attractive
valuations in both real and nominal terms.
In other words: higher longer yields now reflect tight monetary policy, but that restrictive policy
may well depress growth — meaning lower rates later. So buying duration makes sense.
Unhedged would push Michele’s interpretation a step further and suggest caution about stocks,
which might not enjoy such a firm economy for much longer (as we argued yesterday). Making
matters worse for stocks, high real yields give investors an attractive alternative. Days like
Wednesday, when yields rise and stocks fall, fit with this logic.

Our view comes with an asterisk, however. Several of our contacts and colleagues have pointed out
technical or structural reasons for rising long yields, none of which are directly related to US
monetary policy, inflation and growth. These include the effect on Treasury demand of the Bank of
Japan’s loosening of yield curve control; traders’ closing of profitable “curve flattener trades” (buy
the long end of the curve, sell short the short end); mortgage convexity hedging; and the Treasury’s
recent announcement of greater impending issuance of new long-term debt. Depending on how
much influence you think these factors have on long yields, and how long you expect that influence
to last, your appetite for duration will vary.
Still, we are inclined to keep it simple. One does not have to equate higher bond yields with lower
equity valuations to think that, in the current moment, rising long yields will put pressure on
stocks. Those yields reflect restrictive monetary policy that will probably depress economic growth
and present an attractive alternative to stock ownership.

One good read
Patrick Radden Keefe has written an insightful profile of the art dealer Larry Gagosian for The New
Yorker — a much more detailed portrait than my much shorter effort on the same subject for How
To Spend It.

FT Unhedged podcast
Can’t get enough of Unhedged? Listen to our
new podcast, hosted by Ethan Wu and Katie
Martin, for a 15-minute dive into the latest
markets news and financial headlines, twice a
week. Catch up on past editions of the
newsletter here.

Recommended newsletters for you
Swamp Notes — Expert insight on the intersection of money and power in US politics. Sign up
here

The Lex Newsletter — Lex is the FT’s incisive daily column on investment. Sign up for our
newsletter on local and global trends from expert writers in four great financial centres. Sign up
here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US Treasury bonds
US economy
US inflation
Markets
US

