FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion The Long View

Hot milk: what rising prices tell us about inflation
If the cost of a basic commodity is surging in a competitive market then pressures
may persist longer than some expect

CLAIRE JONES

Until recently the average price of a pint of milk in the UK was 42p, but over the past year it has leapt by 40% to 59p © Matthew
Horwood/Getty Images

Claire Jones
Published AUG 19 2022

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
Do you know what a pint of milk costs? It’s a question designed to catch out out-of-touch
celebrities and politicians. In these times of inflationary froth, central bankers — and therefore
markets — might want to pay attention, too.

Prices for milk, one of the most of basic of commodities, are surging. That matters not only for
shoppers, but for those of us after a sign of how sticky inflation will be.
Milk has traditionally proved stubbornly resistant to inflation. Farmers and processors need to
keep margins at a minimum if they want to sell their wares to the supermarket behemoths, which
are under pressure from discount retailers.
These market dynamics — and the fact that we’re now drinking more dairy-free alternatives —
meant that in the UK from 2008 until recently the average price of a pint had been as flat as a glass
of the stuff at 42p. Over the past year, however, it’s leapt by 40 per cent to 59p. That might still
sound like small change. But for a staple that the average person drinks three of a week, it’s pretty
staggering for some.
It’s a similar story elsewhere. In Germany, prices are up by almost a third over the past year, while
the cost of a gallon in the US has risen by 15 per cent since January.

So what does the soaring cost of a pint of milk tell us about the nature of inflation? And how much
of the recent spurt has its origins in the supply-side shortages that emerged during the pandemic?
That we’re seeing it happen in such a competitive market highlights how embedded price rises have
become.
The cost of two of the biggest inputs for dairy farmers — feed and fertiliser — are up 83 per cent
and 179 per cent respectively over the past year, according to the UK Agriculture and Horticulture
Development Board. “With farm input costs rising so significantly, dairy processors have had to
pay more to ensure farmers don’t reduce milk production too much,” says Patty Clayton, the
industry body’s lead dairy analyst.
The war in Ukraine has exacerbated supply-side inflation. The media spotlight on Russia’s invasion
has also meant the rise in costs has not only been painful, but visible — a crucial factor that has
helped processors pass them on to retailers.
Joanna Konings, a senior economist at Dutch bank ING, says the fact that this has happened, after
years of tough negotiation with supermarkets, “shows us just how strong the current rises in input
prices are”.
Some input prices are now falling, however. Among them is the cost of oil, which is vital
throughout the supply chain. “The milk is collected from farms all over the place in tankers so they
are using fuel, then processing the milk takes energy as it involves heating it. Then there is the cost
of delivering lorry loads of milk and cheese and butter by road,” says Maggie Urry, who used to
cover the dairy industry for the Financial Times.
Droughts across the northern hemisphere may have cut short the peak milk-producing “spring
flush”, weighing on output. But, with the cost of commodities broadly down in recent months, milk
price pressures might have peaked.
I suspect, however, that it will be a while yet before the spillover effects work their way through the
supply chain.

When doing their weekly shop, people notice inflation in two ways. The first is if the cost of a staple
they buy often goes up. You may or may not know what the price of milk is, but I very much doubt
you’d be able to tell whether that bottle of Tabasco sauce you purchase twice a year costs more now
than it did during the winter.
The second is if the price of a basket of goods rises. Andrew Porteous, a consumer and retail
analyst at HSBC, says: “Everybody has a few items that they know the price of, but what most of us
notice is what we pay at the checkout, when we go: ‘Oh my, I’ve spent 55 quid this week rather than
50.’”
Supermarkets — keen not to be outdone by the discounters that have robbed them of market share
over the past decade — “want to make sure that the price of their baskets is competitive”, adds
Porteous. They do that by tending to raise costs only of products bought occasionally.
Milk is so ubiquitous that even Mark Carney, the former Bank of England governor who was as
near to rock star status as central bankers get, knew what the price of half a gallon was. Couple that
with an increase in the cost of the average shop and what we have is a very visible rise in inflation.
That visibility matters a lot. It’s likely to not only influence the expectations of shoppers and
businesses about where prices will be this time next year, but make demands for higher wages and
increases in the cost of other products all the more credible. How can you bemoan paying a farmer
more when you’ve felt the pinch yourself?
The rise in the price of a pint looks to me like a portent of inflation’s stickiness. I’d caution against
those market bets that monetary policymakers will soon pivot away from increasing borrowing
costs. Instead Carney’s successor, Andrew Bailey, and his central banking counterparts elsewhere
will have to sit tight while price pressures, from supply chain to supermarket shelf, play out.
claire.jones@ft.com

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Claire Jones
The Long View
Food Prices
Global inflation
UK inflation

