FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Global Economy

Central banks face recessionary dangers
The intent to slash demand, money and credit in the system implies lower turnover
growth

JOHN REDWOOD

Berlin in the snow: EU governments fear a cold winter could lead to energy rationing © Filip Singer/EPA-EFE

John Redwood
Published OCT 6 2022

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
While the attention of many British investors has been riveted on the turmoil in sterling and UK
government bonds, they should not ignore the global context in which these ructions have been
taking place.

Led by the US Federal Reserve, there has been a concerted drive to higher interest rates in the
advanced countries as the central banks respond to the peaks in inflation.
They seek to correct the errors of 2021 when they persevered with ultra-low rates and plenty of
extra money creation for too long. From New York to New Zealand and Brussels to Seoul, official
interest rates have been on the rise. This has led to bond sell-offs, pushing longer term interest
rates upwards in sympathy with the official short rates. I kept the fund out of longer bonds in
anticipation of these moves.
Only China and Japan have stayed out of these changes. They kept inflation down, as they limited
the expansion of their money supplies, keeping credit and prices under better control. Japan still
borrows money for around zero interest.
The danger now is that central banks will switch from making the error of too much money and
credit with rates too low (which is inflationary) to too little money and credit with rates too high —
causing a recession. When asked about this, the Fed replies that tough medicine is needed to cut
inflation, their only current priority.
This year, the 10-year rate of interest on US government debt soared from 1.65 per cent to a peak of
3.94 per cent on September 27. This has forced US mortgage rates up over 6 per cent and led to a
sharp decline in the housing market.
The European Central Bank has been late to stop bond buying and to raise rates, but the German
10-year state borrowing costs have still risen from a negative figure at the start of the year to a
peak of 2.2 per cent recently. With German inflation over 10 per cent that still looks low and means
more rate rises to come.
Both the Fed and the European Central Bank have clearly signalled their wish to raise rates further,
which helped fuel the hectic September sell-off. As a result, the interest rate on very long-term
borrowing is often now lower than the interest rate on shorter-term bonds. This reflects the
growing market view that we are heading into a sharp slowdown of activity which may become
recession in some countries.

Once a recession has been long enough and deep

If the winter is cold — with too
many windless days — there
may need to be tougher moves
by the EU to ration power

enough to satisfy the central bank that inflation has

John Redwood

need to worry about the continued supply problems

been killed, they will have to lower official interest
rates again.
As we edge towards the northern winter, markets

in energy markets. The EU has just announced
policies to cut electricity demand at peak periods, to cap prices and to tax excess profits.
If the winter is cold — with too many windless days — there may need to be tougher moves by the
EU to ration power, with more difficulties for industry in general and high energy using businesses
in particular. The US is in a stronger position with a surplus of gas for its own needs. The surveys
indicate slowdown or recession with industrial orders weaker.
This background has been unhelpful for most share markets as well. The clear intent of central
banks to slash demand, money and credit in the system implies lower turnover growth, falling
profit margins and lower profits for many businesses. The market is also unable yet to put a clear
and believable timeline on how long the central banks will pursue tough policies, and when they
will have to relent to stop a slowdown becoming a slump.
The portfolio has maintained a commitment to shares as a balanced fund has to, with an emphasis
on a widely diversified portfolio around the world index. Switching out of Nasdaq, the US
technology index, helped control losses, with the world index having some sectors like energy that
have done better in these difficult conditions.
The fund still retains some of its specialist exchange traded funds offering exposure to the digital
revolution and the green transition. While activity among the underlying businesses in these areas
has continued to grow, their overall performance has suffered from markets discounting future
growth in revenues and profits at higher discount rates to reflect rising interest rates. Clean energy
and battery technology are the best performers as countries try to force the pace of renewable
investment.

We have had such a sell-off in bonds that I am starting to commit some of the fund’s cash into 10year Treasuries. The world investment markets will not perform well until the US alters policy from
one of promoting recession. European markets remain rightly nervous about the Ukraine war and
disrupted energy markets.
As I write this the market is rallying on hopes of some limits to rising rates as evidence mounts that
inflation will fall next year. Bonds should be the first to turn for the better.
If we are fortunate the Fed will start to relax before triggering a deep recession. If not, the Fed will
relax more at a later date. Either way, inflation will be a lot lower and longer term interest rates will
then fall.
Sir John Redwood is chief global strategist for Charles Stanley. The FT Fund is a dummy
portfolio intended to demonstrate how investors can use a wide range of ETFs to gain exposure
to global stock markets while keeping down the costs of investing. john.redwood@ft.com

The Redwood Fund — October 5 2022
Name

Weight

Cash

19.39%

iShares Core EM IMI ACC

1.90%

iShares Core MSCI WLD GBPH D

20.49%

iShares Global Clean Energy

2.38%

iShares USD Short Dur USD D

12.02%

iShares USD Tips 0-5 GBP-H D

5.63%

iShares USD Treasury 7-10Y

5.00%

L&G All St in Lnk Gilt IN-IA

3.23%

L&G Cyber Security UCITS ETF

2.02%

Source: Charles Stanley

Name

Weight

L&G Hydrogen Economy ETF

1.69%

L&G Robo Global Robotics & Aut

1.83%

Lyxor Core MSCI Japan DR-MHG

2.90%

Lyxor Core UK Government Inf

4.25%

SPDR 0-5 EM USD Government

2.25%

Vang FTSE 250 GBPD

3.97%

X MSCI Korea

1.45%

X MSCI Taiwan

4.04%

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
John Redwood
Global Economy
US Treasury bonds
Bonds
Technology sector

