FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion The FT View

US recession is a smaller danger than long-term inflation
The Fed needs to hold its nerve on tightening further

THE EDITORIAL BOARD

Jay Powell’s next forecasts are expected to be glummer than the last © Kevin Dietsch/Getty

The editorial board
Published JUL 14 2022

It is still possible that the US economy will manage a “soft landing” — taming its inflation problem
and getting the economy back to robust growth without too much pain. But as the weeks go by, the
case for consumers and investors to start buckling up and bracing for a bumpier impact gets ever
stronger.

This week, consumer price inflation was revealed to have hit 9.1 per cent — a 40-year high, above
and beyond the consensus view. Within that, energy prices have risen by 42 per cent, with food up
by 10 per cent. But this is not a story of a few volatile commodities: core inflation, which excludes
those categories, is up by 5.9 per cent on the year.
From here, the Federal Reserve’s decision seems straightforward: raise rates rapidly. After all,
inflation is high and unemployment is low — at just 3.6 per cent. The Bank of Canada — facing a
similar position, with very high inflation and record low unemployment — hiked rates this week by
1 percentage point, up to 2.5 per cent.
Market prices imply investors expect the Fed may follow by raising rates by a similar amount at
their next meeting at the end of July — perhaps raising it by as much as 1 percentage point, too.
Investors expect rates to get to a level of about 3.5 per cent by the end of this year — a level at
which monetary policy is expected to dampen activity.
The case for rapid hikes now is not really about the latest numbers. It is certainly too late to affect
inflation in the past. And, as Joe Biden stated in his response to the figures, it is “also out of date”
in another sense. Many pressures visible in the numbers are abating, as commodity prices have
come down.
One key reason for rate rises now is, as the Bank of Canada put it, “to break the vicious circle . . . to
re-anchor long-term inflation expectations”. Fundamentally, inflation has run out of control.
People negotiating pay packets and setting menu prices will — rightly — be suspicious about
assurances that inflation will return to moderate levels soon. The Fed’s task is to persuade them
that next year will be different.
There is risk here. Interest rate rises work by crunching demand; they kill businesses and induce
job losses. It is possible that rapid rate rises could unnecessarily induce or worsen a recession that
some data suggests is coming anyway.

In such a scenario, tightening may simply deepen a slowdown that was going to do the work of
taming inflation. In addition, expectations do not appear to be unanchored and wage growth is
slowing. There is a danger that supporting big rises now may be to call for a medicine that is worse
than the disease.
But there is peril on the other side, too: being too slow would mean inflation being allowed to fully
embed itself. And it is easier to reverse course by loosening monetary policy than it is to bear down
on an inflationary problem that has seeped into the groundwater.
Medium-term inflation expectations may still be anchored, but we cannot wait for them to come
unmoored before we act. The Fed’s next forecasts are expected to be glummer than the last. But
last time around, they still anticipated continued growth and continued low unemployment even as
they raised rates. There is not any expectation of a coming brutal crash.
Investors have spent much of this week puzzling over what this all means — edging up predictions
for the future path of interest rates and for the chances of recession. But there is good news in some
of it — it is hard to read the markets’ responses as indicating that investors think this ultra-high
inflation is now a permanent feature of American life. The Fed has credibility. But it still needs to
tighten further to justify that faith.
​Letter in response to this article:
​Tennis elbow cure presents good match for inflation / From Patrizio Finicelli, London WC2, UK

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
The editorial board
The FT View
US economy

US inflation
US interest rates

