FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Markets Insight

The Fed needs to stop raising rates
With too much hidden leverage around, the central bank should wait to see if the punch bowl has been
sufficiently drained

BILL GROSS

Jay Powell, chair of the Federal Reserve © Reuters

Bill Gross
Published DEC 19 2022

The writer is a philanthropist, co-founder of Pimco, and author of the 2022 memoir I’m Still
Standing, Bond King Bill Gross and the Pimco Express.
“Love lift us up where we belong,” rings the theme song from the 1982 film An Officer and a
Gentleman. Substitute the “Fed” for “love” and you have the theme of 2022-2023, with the global
central bank’s captain, Jay Powell, doing the heavy lifting.

We need to renormalise the cost of money. Most of us would agree to this. But how high is that and
for how long? Among economists, Larry Summers suggests as high as 6 per cent for the Federal
Reserve’s target funds rate but Jeremy Siegel suggests 3 to 4 per cent is enough. As Fed chair,
Powell strongly affirms we will be lifting higher from the current 4.25 to 4.5 per cent target, but
warns that the peak in rates and its duration will depend on data in the months ahead.
I suggest several clues to this conundrum. First, aside from the critical focus on US employment,
global growth and financial conditions, it is important to analyse what level and pace of real
interest rates have historically slowed economic growth in past cycles and led to acceptable
inflationary targets.
I emphasise real as opposed to nominal yields because the Fed’s and other central banks’ dream
outcome is the infrequently mentioned “r-star” — the “neutral” level of overnight money rates net
of inflation that is consistent with stable economic conditions.
This is perhaps too complex for widespread public use and is hard to calculate based on forward
assumptions of the consumer price index. The 0 per cent or less rate that we saw in some recent
years is also an anomaly given the trillions of dollars created under quantitative easing
programmes.
Nonetheless, apart from this period, historical statistics over the last several decades would show
that on average, an r-star in the US of 2 per cent would be enough to flatten growth and raise
unemployment. And an r-star of 0 per cent or less would be enough to accelerate inflation above
central bank targets.
It’s the 2 per cent that forecasters seem to pass over in their analysis. I would argue that with the
Fed’s inflation target of 2 per cent and with the targeted current fed funds rate at 4.25 to 4.5 per
cent and going higher in February, we are already at the optimum r-star rate and will probably stay
there for some time if — and a big if — inflation appears to be approaching acceptable levels, even
above 2 per cent.

The danger of overshooting and the need to have a forward-looking monetary policy argue strongly
for this. The Fed should now stop raising rates and wait to see if the punch bowl has been
sufficiently drained.
Second, however, I think it important to recognise the dangerous levels of debt recently
acknowledged by the Bank for International Settlements. “Off-balance sheet dollar debt”, they
warned in a December 5 update, “may remain out of sight and out of mind, but only until the next
time dollar funding liquidity is squeezed.”
They calculate this hidden “shadow bank” debt may be as high as $65tn, more than 2½ times the
size of the entire Treasury market and that most of it is owed to banks. Shades of prior Minksy
moments!
Minsky’s famous theory is that stability leads to sudden periods of instability brought on by
excessive risk-taking argues for commonsensical caution. See the Ponzi schemes —
cryptocurrencies, non-fungible tokens etc — created aplenty by central banks under the cover of
Covid.
The economist and journalist Walter Bagehot noted the pain point for savers in the days of old in
the UK: “John Bull can stand many things, but he cannot stand 2 per cent!” Could then Mr Bull
stand the 0 per cent or less of the past few years?
The lowest global rates in history since 2020 have led to massive misallocations of capital. Much of
it is in hidden private equity that ultimately must be repriced sharply lower. It is also reflected in
housing prices worldwide that resemble 2005-2008 and pose a risk for lenders much like in the era
that preceded the global financial crisis. Having locked in historically low mortgage rates,
borrowers should not suffer the same default rates as then, but their ability to access future equitybased loans should be severely limited as home prices decline.
There could be trouble ahead if the 4.25 to 4.5 per cent nominal fed funds rate and 2 per cent r-star
go higher. Too much hidden leverage, too much shadow debt behind closed doors. To paraphrase
the Persian poet Omar Khayyam, the moving Fed should pause, then after having done so, should
move on.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Bill Gross
Markets Insight
Global Economy
Global inflation
US inflation

