FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Unhedged

The Fed talks about not talking about Trump
Jay Powell sets some limits

ROBERT ARMSTRONG

Jay Powell said: ‘We don’t guess, we don’t speculate, and we don’t assume’ © Bloomberg

Robert Armstrong and Aiden Reiter
Published NOV 8 2024

This article is an on-site version of our Unhedged newsletter. Premium subscribers can sign up
here to get the newsletter delivered every weekday. Standard subscribers can upgrade to
Premium here, or explore all FT newsletters

Good morning. Ride-share company Lyft jumped 22 per cent yesterday and sportswear maker
Under Armour was up 27 per cent. The two companies reported good quarters and upgraded
forecasts, after years of uninspiring results. Both are second fiddles to larger competitors Uber and
Nike, respectively. Is this an underdog market? Should we expect great things from Pepsi next
quarter? Email us: robert.armstrong@ft.com and aiden.reiter@ft.com.

The Fed
In central banking, boredom is success. Yesterday’s Federal Reserve policy announcement and
press conference were, by this measure, successful. A quarter of a percentage point was snipped off
the policy rate. Chair Jay Powell said nothing new about how he and his colleagues see the
economy. They still think the following: inflation is falling, the economy is sound, and policy is
restrictive. And they are still feeling their way towards a neutral rate, which they will only know
when they hit it.
There was no appreciable market reaction. Well done, everyone.
Reporters pressed Powell on what the re-election of Donald Trump, who has made unpleasant
noises about the Fed and him in the past, meant for bank policy. Here some non-boring moments
managed to slip though. One such moment was the only one-word answer in Powell’s tenure (to
the best of Unhedged’s recollection). Would he leave his job before the end of his term, if Trump
asked him to? “No.” Next question. Then there was a curt five-worder. Does the president have the
ability to fire you or other Fed leaders? “Not permitted under the law.” Noted.
Furthermore, Powell made clear that possible changes in policy under a new Trump administration
would not be taken into account by Fed policymakers until those policies were enacted: “We don’t
guess, we don’t speculate, and we don’t assume.” (Unhedged’s motto: “We guess, we speculate, we
assume.” It takes all kinds.)
A more paranoid interpreter of Fed statements than Unhedged might wonder if this is strictly true.

Powell was asked about the recent rise in long-term interest rates, and whether these higher
borrowing costs presented a risk to growth — as he said they did when they were at almost as high
a level a year ago, when inflation was still high. The question was clever. The market consensus is
the rise in the 10-year Treasury yield is down to “Trumpflation”. The argument is that the next
president’s tax, immigration, and tariff policies will increase inflation, and therefore require tighter
monetary policy, and increase the deficit, requiring higher compensation to tempt investors to buy
the government’s long-term obligations. So the question was about Trump, without mentioning
Trump explicitly. Here is part of Powell’s answer:

It’s too early to really say where [long rates] settle . . . I will say, though, that
it appears that the moves are not principally about higher inflation
expectations. They’re really about a sense of more likelihood of stronger
growth, and perhaps less in the way of downside risks. So that’s what they’re
about. You know, we do take financial conditions into account. If they’re
persistent and if they’re material, then we will certainly take them into
account in our policy. But I would say we’re not, we’re not at that state right
now.
In one sense, Powell is quite right. The chart below breaks down the increase in 10-year Treasury
yields since they bottomed in late September. The larger part of the increase is accounted for by
real interest rates, here proxied by yields on inflation protected Treasuries (Tips), in light blue.
Almost 40 per cent of the increase is, however, down to higher break-even inflation (the difference
between nominal yields and Tips), in dark blue. Higher inflation expectations are an important
part of the picture.

Great expectations
Basis points
10-year breakeven inflation

10-year real rates (Tips yields)

80

60

40

20

0
September

October

November
Source: Bloomber

Yet, the fact that most of the increase is driven by higher real yields does not imply that it is
principally about growth expectations. Higher real yields can reflect growth expectations — which
draw money away from safe Treasuries and towards riskier assets. But they can also mean
investors are demanding more compensation for higher rate volatility in the future — exactly what
investors might do if they thought that the US fiscal situation was becoming more perilous. But
talking about the latter possibility would draw Powell into a conversation about responding to
things that are (at least in the eyes of the market) very much effects of Trump’s expected policies.
And Powell has vowed not to talk about expected policies, let alone act on them. Saying the rate
increase is about growth lets him off the hook.

Powell and his team may be decoding the rise in long rates differently than I am, and may have
very good reasons to think it is about growth rather than inflation or the fiscal outlook. The point is
not to doubt his sincerity, but to highlight what a delicate balance he will have to strike in the
months to come, as the shape of Trump’s policies become clearer — or, worse, do not.

One good read
Europe’s indispensable nation is in trouble.

FT Unhedged podcast
Can’t get enough of Unhedged? Listen to our
new podcast, for a 15-minute dive into the
latest markets news and financial headlines,
twice a week. Catch up on past editions of
the newsletter here.

Recommended newsletters for you
Due Diligence — Top stories from the world of corporate finance. Sign up here
Chris Giles on Central Banks — Vital news and views on what central banks are thinking,
inflation, interest rates and money. Sign up here

Letter in response to this article:
Why president-elect is good for Europe’s economies / From David Crook, Tail Wind Advisory &
Management, London WC2, UK

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Robert Armstrong
Unhedged
Global inflation
US economy
US inflation

