FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Markets Insight

Traders are not pricing in a policy of benign neglect on US inflation
Persistent wage growth could keep interest rates higher for longer

MATTHEW C KLEIN

Fed chair Jay Powell. Many Fed officials would be unwilling to force the economy into a downturn if inflation stabilised around 4% a
year, instead of 2% © Jim Lo Scalzo/EPA-EFE

Matthew C Klein
Published AUG 14 2023

The writer is publisher of The Overshoot research service and co-author of ‘Trade Wars are Class
Wars’

Markets are currently pricing in the most benign possible outcome: that US inflation continues to
decelerate even as real output keeps growing briskly. While this is certainly possible, it is at least as
likely that inflation will stabilise at a rate roughly 2 percentage points faster than the Federal
Reserve’s 2 per cent yearly goal. In that scenario, shorter-term interest rates would remain at their
current levels for some time, if not go even higher, which in turn would pull up longer-term yields
and push down valuation multiples. That could spell trouble for asset prices.
At first glance, this seems like an odd time to be expressing concern. US inflation has already
slowed from roughly 10 per cent a year in the first half of 2022 to about 3 per cent a year. This
slowdown has coincided with robust growth in real consumer spending and millions of extra jobs.
Having made it this far, it feels churlish to suggest that inflation will not decelerate painlessly to 2
per cent from here.
But the slowdown in inflation reflects the unwinding of temporary disruptions associated with the
coronavirus pandemic and Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine. These events reduced the supply
of goods and services, pushing up prices. As conditions have normalised, many prices have stopped
rising or even dropped outright.
These swings have masked the modest but persistent acceleration in underlying price pressures.
Just as investors and policymakers were right to look through the “transitory” inflation of 20212022, they should also strip out the “transitory” disinflation of 2022-2023 to get a handle on where
such pressures will settle in the years ahead. Since inflation is just the difference between changes
in nominal spending and real production, that means focusing on wage trends: the largest and
most reliable source of financing for consumer spending.

Since 1929, the average American worker’s hourly wage has grown about 1.6 percentage points
faster than the PCE price index each year. Wages have grown at least 3 percentage points faster
than prices in only 17 of the past 92 years for which we have data, of which only five occurred after
1956. Between 2000 and 2019, average hourly wages consistently grew just 1 percentage point
faster than prices each year. Wages have grown 4 or more percentage points faster than prices only
a handful of times: at the beginning of the Great Depression, during the rationing and price
controls of the second world war and the Korean war, in the late 1990s productivity boom, and
during the first year of the pandemic.
Now, however, the best data suggests that US wages are rising at a yearly rate of about 5 per cent.
Moreover, persistent wage growth means that interest rates may stay “higher for longer”— unless
consumers start spending a much lower share of their incremental earnings, real output per worker
rises sharply, or both.
Federal Reserve boss Jay Powell agrees. At his recent press conference, he said: “we want wages to
be going up at a level that’s consistent with 2 per cent inflation over time” and that “wages are
probably an important issue going forward”. This explains Fed officials’ continued focus on
“softening” the job market via higher interest rates. That presents a risk that interest rates may not
come down as quickly as implied by market prices, which in turn could affect other asset
valuations.
Futures in Sofr, the floating interest rate benchmark, currently imply that short-term interest rates
will drop to 3.5 per cent by the end of 2025, while break-even inflation rates imply that prices will
rise almost exactly 2 per cent a year from now for the next three decades. Meanwhile, credit
spreads are tighter than they were in 2019 and earnings multiples on stocks have jumped. By some
measures, the prospective returns on stocks relative to bonds are lower than at any point since
mid-2007, implying extreme optimism about future profit growth. This combination only makes
sense if inflation returns to 2 per cent — and wage growth decelerates commensurately — without
any hit to real output.

Many Fed officials would be unwilling to force the economy into a downturn just because inflation
stabilised around 4 per cent a year, instead of 2 per cent. It was not long ago that many leading
economists were recommending 4 per cent inflation targets, or, in what amounts to roughly the
same thing, a 5 to 6 per cent yearly nominal income growth target. But while a policy of benign
neglect might make sense, it is not currently priced in.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Matthew C Klein
Markets Insight
US inflation
US interest rates
Federal Reserve

