FT PROFESSIONAL

Trump tariffs

Top Federal Reserve official says US could require rate cuts if big tariffs return
Governor Christopher Waller warns that should Trump resume steep duties growth will ‘slow to a crawl’

Christopher Waller: ‘While I expect the inflationary effects of higher tariffs to be temporary, their effects on output and employment
could be longer-lasting’ © Al Drago/Bloomberg

Claire Jones in Washington
Published APR 14 2025

The Federal Reserve may need to cut interest rates sharply to prop up the US economy if Donald
Trump follows through on his threat to resume big “reciprocal” tariffs, a top official at the central
bank has warned.
Christopher Waller, a Fed governor, said on Monday that if the US president reimposed the levies
unveiled on April 2, then the US central bank would be forced to quickly make a series of “bad
news” rate cuts.

Trump last week suspended the “reciprocal” tariffs for 90 days shortly after they were imposed
amid market ructions over measures Waller said would put the effective levy on US imports at
more than 25 per cent — up from 3 per cent in December 2024.
The US at the weekend temporarily excluded phones, chipmaking equipment and certain
computers from the reciprocal tariffs.
Waller said that if Trump applied big reciprocal tariffs after the pause, US economic growth would
“slow to a crawl”, while the unemployment rate would rise “significantly” from 4.2 per cent to 5 per
cent next year.
He said he believed that, while inflation could rise as high as 5 per cent in the near term, any hit to
price pressures would prove fleeting — paving the way for Fed cuts to weigh against the impact of
an economic slowdown.
“While I expect the inflationary effects of higher tariffs to be temporary, their effects on output and
employment could be longer-lasting and an important factor in determining the appropriate stance
of monetary policy,” said Waller on Monday. “If the slowdown is significant and even threatens a
recession, then I would expect to favour cutting the . . . policy rate sooner, and to a greater extent
than I had previously thought.”
Waller’s views clash with those of other members of the policymaking Federal Open Market
Committee — several of whom believe that there is a risk of a persistent surge in inflation because
of the tariffs. While Trump has paused the “reciprocal tariffs”, many levies remain, including on
steel and aluminium imports and many goods from China, the world’s biggest exporter.
Other FOMC members have stuck by a “wait and see” approach to lowering borrowing costs, saying
that they would need to see evidence in the hard data of a slowdown before responding.
Trump has persistently called on the Fed to cut interest rates, taking aim at chair Jay Powell, who
the US president has accused of acting too late in lowering borrowing costs.

The US central bank has kept interest rates on hold at a 4.25 to 4.5 per cent range since the turn of
the year, amid signs that the new administration’s trade policies will raise inflation and stunt
growth.
However, Waller’s views on the rise in unemployment echo a New York Fed poll of consumer
sentiment published earlier on Monday, which showed 44 per cent of people now think
unemployment will rise in the next year. The figure is the highest since the pandemic and is up 10
percentage points since Trump took office.
Waller said the tariffs unveiled on April 2 were “dramatically larger” than he had anticipated,
adding that levies “this large and broadly applied” could significantly affect the world’s largest
economy.
The Fed governor said that if the 90-day suspension marked “the beginning of a concerted effort”
to negotiate lower trade barriers, then the US central bank could have “more patience” in lowering
interest rates.
Waller also took aim at the US president’s view that the tariffs could quickly turn the US back into
a manufacturing behemoth.
“Keeping the large tariffs in place [until at least the end of 2027] would be necessary if the primary
goal is remaking the US economy, which is now mostly services, into one that produces a larger
share of the goods it consumes,” he said. “Such a shift, if it is possible, would be a dramatic change
for the United States and would surely take longer than three years.”

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Trump tariffs
US economy

US inflation
US interest rates
Federal Reserve

