FT PROFESSIONAL

FT-Booth Survey US interest rates

US Fed will cut interest rates just once this year, say economists
FT-Chicago Booth poll respondents also raise their outlook for inflation

President Joe Biden is battling low approval ratings on his handling of the economy amid voter anxiety over the cost of mortgages,
food, and other goods © Frederic Brown/Getty Images

Claire Jones and Martha Muir in Washington and Eva Xiao in New York
Published JUN 11 2024

The Federal Reserve will lower interest rates just once this year, according to a new poll of
academic economists, as lingering inflation forces the US central bank to adjust its schedule to cut
borrowing costs.
More than half of the 39 academics that took part in the FT-Chicago Booth poll said that the Fed
would only make one quarter-point cut this year. Almost a quarter forecast no cuts at all.

The results of the survey, conducted in the final week of May, come ahead of the Fed’s meeting on
Wednesday, when rate setters are expected to shift their own predictions for cuts this year from
three to two, or fewer.
Expectations that rates will remain higher for longer follow months of stickier-than-expected
inflation. The US Bureau of Labor Statistics will publish its consumer price index data for May on
Wednesday, just hours before the Fed’s rate announcement.
Borrowing costs remaining high through November’s US election would be a blow to President Joe
Biden, who is battling low approval ratings on his handling of the economy amid voter anxiety over
the cost of mortgages, food, and other goods.
Economists in the poll also upped their forecasts for the personal consumption expenditures price
index — another gauge of price inflation — from 2.5 per cent in the March poll to 2.8 per cent now.
The Fed targets PCE of 2 per cent. Headline PCE was 2.7 per cent in April, the Bureau of Economic
Analysis said in late May.

Polled economists are increasingly hawkish on Fed rate cuts this year
% respondents answering how much they expect the federal funds rate to be cut in 2024 by survey
date
Jun 2024

40%

Mar 2024

Dec 2023

Karen Dynan, a professor at Harvard University and poll respondent, said recent data had raised
“worries about whether higher-than-target inflation is becoming embedded”.
Fed officials believe the continued strength of the jobs market gives them leeway to keep rates at a
23-year high of 5.25-5.5 per cent, unlike central banks in the Eurozone and Canada, which both cut
rates last week.

Investors have significantly lowered rate cut expectations since March
Implied number of cuts by Fed meeting date according to Fed funds futures pricing in March and
June, with each cut representing a change of 25bps
June

March

4

3

2

Economists’ expectations of a soft landing for the US economy have also risen. The poll shows 52
per cent of respondents did not see recession until 2026 or beyond, up from 46 per cent in March.
A third of poll respondents — the biggest group — think the Fed will make its first cut this year in
September, at the central bank’s last meeting before the November 5 election.

Julie Smith, a professor at Lafayette College, said a September move was likely “and maybe
another one later in the year after the US election”.
But she said Fed rate changes in the autumn would be “very tricky” because of “how it interplays
with US politics and the presidential election”.

Economist bets on a soft landing have risen
Average probability (%) among polled economists that a recession will start at a given quarter
Mar 2024

Jun 2024

2024 Q2 or earlier
2024 Q3/Q4
2025 Q1/Q2
2025 Q3/Q4
2026 Q1 or later

While the central bank is almost certain to leave rates unchanged this week, Fed-watchers expect
the Federal Open Market Committee’s so-called “dot plot” to show a reduction in the number of
cuts policymakers see this year.
Claudia Sahm, a former Fed staffer who is now chief economist at investment manager New
Century Advisors, said a disappointing CPI figure for May could lead officials to switch from three
to one.
“The Fed doesn’t like to be abrupt unless they have to be,” said Sahm, who was not polled. “[But]
they want to show that they’re responsive to data.”

Respondents' estimates of inflation tick up
Polled economists' estimates of core PCE inflation rate (%) in the 12-month period ending in
December 2024 by survey date
5

4

3

2

1

Mar 2024

Jun 2024

Source: FT-Booth surveys of 38 economists March 8-13 and 39 economists May 31-June 5

The FT-Chicago Booth poll, conducted by the university’s Kent A Clark Center for Global Markets,
also highlighted economists’ concerns about the US’s ballooning fiscal debt.
The Congressional Budget Office, an official US spending watchdog, said in May that the federal
debt was set to reach 166 per cent of GDP by 2054.
More than half of the poll’s respondents said CBO’s debt estimate was credible, while more than a
quarter said it was too low.
“There’s a risk given the possibility of geopolitical events and the need to respond to climate
change, that we’re going to see even further upward pressure,” said Dynan.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global inflation
US interest rates
University of Chicago Booth School of Business
Federal Reserve
FT-Booth Survey

