FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion UK inflation

Tackling the root cause of energy bills could help us all on inflation
By ramping up the Warm Home Discount scheme, Rishi Sunak could help vulnerable households and change
the narrative

KITTY USSHER

Policymakers could intervene on household bills in a way that directly reduces inflation © Matthew Horwood/Getty Images

Kitty Ussher
Published MAY 26 2022

The writer is chief economist at the Institute of Directors
In normal times, the Bank of England would go out of its way to avoid a recession, and not just
because of the human cost. The “symmetric” nature of its inflation target means it is as concerned
about undershooting as overshooting.

In a high inflation environment, however, such concerns are jettisoned. With shortages on the
supply side — energy, superconductors, staff — it’s the simple laws of supply and demand that
drive prices up. Given we can’t fix those any time soon, the only other option is to reduce demand.
This is a tough love message: no wonder therefore that global equity markets have gone into a jitter
as they try to process its implications.
Facing this situation, what the UK economy needs most of all is a moment when people believe
inflation is peaking, and so will soon start to fall. Not only will that reassure central bankers that
they don’t need to prioritise prices over steady growth, but it could also prove self-fulfilling if it
calms expectations and so lessens the likelihood of factoring rising prices into every business
decision.
As recently as January, the expectation was that inflation would peak in April when the household
energy price cap was raised. Now, surveys of Institute of Directors members suggest it will be much
further into the future. The irony is that the price cap, designed to protect consumers from volatile
energy markets, is now delaying the moment at which people think we are through the worst.
For policymakers, however, this delay is also an opportunity, as it gives them time to decide on the
nature of their response. So why not intervene on household bills in a way that directly reduces
inflation? That would help persuade business and consumers that we are through the worst and
therefore change behaviour. It’s a policy win-win: supporting vulnerable households at the same
time as changing the inflation narrative.
This means the much-anticipated intervention by chancellor Rishi Sunak should address the root
cause of the problem, namely the energy bill itself. This is what is in the basket of goods used to
calculate consumer price inflation.
One option would be to reduce the rate of VAT on fuel but this is ill-targeted and potentially of
limited impact since it can only be cut from the current rate of 5 per cent to zero. A better option
would be to ramp up the support offered by the existing Warm Home Discount scheme, through
which people on lower incomes apply to have their bills reduced. The government has recently
decided to expand the scheme and make the payments automatic. This means much of the
preparatory work has already been done.

In order to affect CPI, the subsidy to bills should be broad-based but could simultaneously be
progressive. The scheme as currently designed has two groups based on differing needs; the most
vulnerable could therefore receive more support in recognition that energy bills make up a higher
proportion of their total household expenditure. It would also need to be directly funded from the
Treasury — presumably from the proposed windfall tax — rather than being cross-subsidised from
other bills.
By convention, Bank of England inflation forecasts do not take account of policy announcements
that have not been officially made, even if they appear likely. However, if the chancellor announces
his intention to reduce the actual bills that households will pay with the explicit aim of putting
downward pressure on CPI, that would affect the official forecasts. In that way, by tackling the root
cause, policy intervention can contribute directly to the sense that we are over the worst, which
then in turn will start to improve the overall economic environment to the benefit of us all.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Kitty Ussher
Global inflation
UK economy
UK inflation
UK politics

