FT PROFESSIONAL

Alphaville Global inflation

Inflation is not the only demon
The God of price stability is dead

Central banks face a tricky balancing act © George Hodan (CC0 Public Domain)

Edward Price
Published JUN 16 2022

Edward Price is a former British economic official and current teacher of political economy at
New York University’s Center for Global Affairs.
As central banks attempt to tackle this global inflationary spiral we should ask ourselves a very
simple question. Worried inflation-targeting central banks now only care about inflation targets,
right? Wrong.

Look no further than the European Central Bank. Last week, the ECB confirmed its intention to
raise interest rates by 25 basis points in July. On the face of things, this is good. In May, consumer
inflation in the 19-member euro zone hit a record 8.1 per cent. That is not so good. In fact, that is
très mauvais. Bringing this upward price pressure under control is now Christine Lagarde’s
number one concern.
But it is not her only concern. Check out Martin Arnold’s succinct expression of the ECB’s other
fears in the FT:

. . . the ECB . . . [is] hoping to regain control of prices without tipping the
economy into recession or triggering a bond market panic in the more
vulnerable countries of southern Europe.
This smells a bit like 2010 doesn’t it? Yesterday, for example, the ECB announced a new “antifragmentation instrument”. That probably means more bond buying, which, in turn, would mean
anything but an anti-inflation instrument. And earlier this week, M&G Investments’ Eric Lonergan
predicted that the second euro crisis has now started.
So yes, today’s central bankers fret about inflation – as the Fed’s decision yesterday to lift rates by a
whopping 0.75 per cent underscores. But they are also fretting about whether and why their
economies are in equilibrium and whether and why their financial systems (and currencies) are
sound.
The question is how aggressively monetary policy should intervene to dampen prices in the face of
supply shocks, the duration of which are unknown. This is tough. How far monetary authorities
should allow any economy to adapt to new global circumstances is unclear if, in turn, those new
global circumstances are themselves unclear. Perhaps Ukrainian special forces now have more
influence on monetary conditions than any central bank.

It’s a tricky balancing act. Moreover, an inflation-targeting central bank’s tools are not always
pointed at prices anyway. We could say that policy innovations after 2007-8, including the 2020
pandemic response, deviated from strict inflation targeting.
For the best example, take quantitative easing (QE), which initially aimed at providing the financial
system with ample liquidity and exploded central bank balance sheets the world over. Behold, the
total assets of the Federal Reserve System.

At least there is some room for non-inflationary concerns. Today’s policymakers don’t face the
inflation problem of the 1980s (see here for Nick Peterson’s take on the Volcker mythos). But, in
fighting now-rampant inflation, they will have to worry about the novel side-effects of rate hikes on
nervy financial markets and pallid economies. This is, after all, effectively wartime.

The wider point is that central banks make judgment calls. And while inflation may be the main
policy concern at the moment, it is far from the only one. Finding the balance between all of them
is probably impossible to get exactly right.
As central bankers have hinted in recent years, even knowing what exactly to calculate, measure or
model is never easy. In 2018, at Jackson Hole, Powell had said this to say about the bread and
butter of economics, the natural levels of things like unemployment and interest rates also known
as the stars:

Navigating by the stars can sound straightforward. Guiding policy by the
stars in practice, however, has been quite challenging . . . because our best
assessments of the location of the stars have been changing significantly.

The Fed chief was hinting at two open secrets. One, whether any given economy is running in an
optimal way is, erm, unknown. Two, what policy should do in response to apparently suboptimal
outcomes is, erm, also unknown. Even for those of us who warned inflation was going to be a
problem (yes, Larry Summers, you win macro), who’s to say that wasn’t just a guess? No one. Now
the reality of ex ante macro uncertainties are becoming clear in the reality of ex post inflation.
So, spare a thought for the ECB, the Fed and other inflation-targeting central banks. The reality is
that they are not only targeting inflation. And they are not doing so because we do not want them
to target only inflation.
Instead, we have asked them to spare us price pressures while also asking for guaranteed growth.
We have asked them to avoid market meltdowns, while also asking for happy currencies. We have,
in essence, spent 35 years asking our central bankers for an upside without expecting a down.
Perhaps central bankers shouldn’t have listened. But now the bill is due, we shouldn’t also ask
them to shoulder all the blame. Price stability is dead. And we killed it - you and I.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global inflation
European banks
Central banks
European Central Bank
Alphaville

