FT PROFESSIONAL

Alphaville News

Inflation: the good, the bad and the ugly
. . . featuring rent, pets, and (obviously) car insurance

Alexandra Scaggs
Published JUL 12 2023

Americans haven’t seen headline inflation of 2 per cent and change in a long time.
OK, sure, the “change” in this case is almost an entire percentage point. But still, even 3 per cent
annual headline inflation is nothing to scoff at.
If the trend continues, this could mean the Fed will raise rates just once more. Financial-market
moves back up that view. The basics: Treasury yields are down, stocks are up, and the CME’s
FedWatch tool is pricing a lower probability of rates rising above 5.5 per cent by December’s
meeting.

So how do we guess gauge whether this deceleration will continue? It never hurts to look at the
underlying data.
Bad news first: Shelter inflation was still pretty high in June, up 7.9 per cent from last year. And
rent for primary residences climbed most, up 8.3 per cent in that time. The more transitory TSwift
Lift was muted in comparison, with lodging away from home climbing ~5 per cent from last year.
Rent inflation tends to be more persistent than goods and services for obvious reasons (annual
contracts etc).
The good news: Used-car prices have started to decline, off 5.2 per cent from last year.
Eggflation is over, with egg prices down almost 8 per cent. Gas prices are down more than 25 per
cent (we love a good commodity price drop), and car rental prices are down 12 per cent. Airfare is
down 19 per cent.
But the most interesting data in June’s report may be . . .
The ugly stuff: Pet food is up 12 per cent from last year, and veterinarian costs are up 11 per cent.
Car insurance costs are still on a tear, even though used-car prices have declined. They’re up nearly
17 per cent from a year ago, though the monthly jump of 1.7 per cent marks a . . . slight
deceleration? (we guess?) from the prior month’s 2-per-cent increase. Relatedly, motor-vehicle
repair costs are up 20 per cent.
It isn’t clear how much the pet-food inflation will persist. But that’s a pretty wild price increase in
motor-vehicle insurance and repair costs, and it isn’t clear how transitory that is going to be.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Alphaville
Alexandra Scaggs

