FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Markets Insight

The fate of dollar rests on the US election
How a Biden or Trump second term as president could affect the currency

BARRY EICHENGREEN

The consequences of a second Trump term are difficult to forecast but even Joe Biden will have less room for manoeuvre if he wins
again © Reuters

Barry Eichengreen
Published JUL 1 2024

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
The writer is professor of economics and political science at the University of California, Berkeley
The fate of the dollar — like much else — turns on the outcome of this November’s US presidential
vote. On this everyone agrees. They just don’t agree on the direction of the turn.

The implications of a victory for Democrats are relatively uncontroversial. The dollar has been
strong in recent years because President Joe Biden has championed a strong dose of fiscal stimulus
while freeing the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates in response to inflation. This mix of loose
fiscal and tight monetary policies has made for a strong currency, as the textbooks predict.
But with the budget deficit already wide and public debt having risen to levels that many
Americans find alarming, a re-elected Biden — or a victory for a replacement among the Democrats
if he stands down after last week’s debate — would have less fiscal room for manoeuvre.
Meanwhile, the Fed would be able to bring down its policy rates as inflation recedes further, as it
presumably will. Thus, the policy mix would be less dollar-positive in a second Biden term. This by
no means augurs a dollar crisis, but it is a recipe for a somewhat weaker greenback.
Finally, the Biden administration has been careful to co-operate with allies when imposing
financial sanctions on Russia. Hence its weaponisation of the dollar has not led to widespread
reserve diversification that might weaken the currency. Co-operation means that other countries
potentially targeted by sanctions have had nowhere to go.
The currency consequences of a second presidential term for Donald Trump are more difficult to
forecast. It is tempting to extrapolate from the past, as a team of Citi analysts did earlier this year.
The dollar rallied by some 5 per cent following Trump’s surprise 2016 victory, they observe. It
declined by a similar amount around the time of his 2020 electoral defeat. On these grounds, it is
tempting to think that a Trump victory in 2024 would again result in a stronger dollar.
Indeed, Trump well may be planning more tax cuts for business and the wealthy. He is less likely to
be critical of debt and deficits when he is their author. And we have seen how expansionary fiscal
policy can be dollar-positive.
Similarly, new tariffs on imports, despite their costs, are also likely to be dollar-supportive. Tariffs
render imports more expensive. They induce consumers to shift their spending towards domestic
goods, pushing up their prices as well. The Fed is apt to respond to the resulting inflation by again
raising rates, which would strengthen the dollar. A stronger dollar exchange rate would push
import prices back down, at least in part, helping the central bank to achieve its disinflationary
goal.

But one can also envisage other scenarios. A self-avowed low-interest-rate man, Trump might
pressure the Fed not to respond in this way. The result, sustained inflation, would be dollarnegative. Trump’s advisers have already mooted changing the Fed’s legal position, mandate or
procedures to require it to consult with or even take marching orders from the president. In any
case, come May 2026, Trump as president would have the straightforward option of nominating a
more compliant Fed chair. He presumably would do so, having learnt from he describes as his
“mistake” of choosing Jay Powell, who was sworn in in 2018.

Have your say

Moreover, rumours are rife that influential Trump
advisers are plotting for a weaker dollar. They saw
how the currency’s strength offset the impact on the
trade balance of the tariffs imposed in Trump’s first
term. They appear committed to preventing the same
from happening again.

Joe Biden vs Donald Trump: tell us
how the 2024 US election will affect
you

They are likely to advocate additional sanctions
against countries that do not prevent their currencies
from falling against the dollar. They can point to the
1985 Plaza Accord as an example of how foreign
governments can be pressured by the US into

adopting exchange-rate-strengthening policies. Another idea is a tax on foreign purchases of US
assets to prevent such foreign investment from supporting the greenback at high levels.
Whether these dubious measures would in fact achieve their goal of strengthening the competitive
position of US manufacturing is questionable. A tax on foreign capital that discourages investment
in the US would not make for a more competitive American economy. Threatening countries with
more tariffs if their currencies don’t decline may only have the undesired effect of strengthening
the dollar further. But, dubious or not, these measures can’t be ruled out.
Letter in response to this article:
The problems a Trump second term poses for the dollar / From J Paul Horne, Alexandria, VA, US

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Barry Eichengreen
Markets Insight
Global Economy
US economy
US politics & policy

