FT PROFESSIONAL

FirstFT World

FirstFT: Powell expects Fed to make three rate cuts this year
Also in today’s newsletter, Taylor Swift makes music industry history and Bill Gates-backed company
discovers huge copper deposit

Jay Powell took a bullish view of the US economy in an interview on Sunday with the ‘60 Minutes’ show © Al Drago/Bloomberg

Gordon Smith
Published FEB 4 2024 | Updated FEB 5 2024, 06:24

This article is an on-site version of our FirstFT newsletter. Sign up to our Asia, Europe/Africa or
Americas edition to get it sent straight to your inbox every weekday morning

Good morning.
The Federal Reserve’s rate-setters still expect to make about three quarter-point rate cuts this year,
its chair Jay Powell said in an interview that aired last night.

Powell told CBS’s 60 Minutes show that “almost all” of the members of the Federal Open Market
Committee think the US central bank will cut rates from their current 23-year high of 5.25 to 5.5
per cent at some point over the course of 2024.
Before Friday’s non-farm payrolls report, which one economist called “stunning”, many investors
had been expecting six interest rate cuts this year.
The Fed chair said in the interview, recorded before the latest jobs numbers were released, that the
labour market was still “very, very strong”, helping the US economy to avoid recession.
“The kind of pain that I was worried about and so many others were, we haven’t had that,” he
added.
US government bonds extended Friday’s losses today as investors bet interest rates would stay
higher for longer to keep a lid on inflation. Read more excerpts from last night’s interview.

More news on interest rates: A rapid fall in US inflation has opened
the way for interest rate cuts within months, the OECD said today.
Go deeper: A year ago central banks began laying the ground for interest
rate cuts but hot labour markets have meant rate-setters have been
reluctant to declare victory over inflation.
With their battle against inflation in the home straight, what’s next for rate-setters? Sign up for
our Central Banks premium newsletter by Chris Giles, or upgrade your subscription here.
Here’s what I’m keeping tabs on today:

Markets: The S&P 500 will be in focus today after the US equity index
closed at a record high on Friday following strong results from Meta and
Amazon.
Results: Caterpillar, Estée Lauder, McDonald’s and Tyson Foods report
earnings.

Monetary policy: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago President Austan
Goolsbee and Atlanta Fed president Raphael Bostic will speak in public
today. Bank of Canada governor Tiff Macklem gives a speech and then a
news conference.
Blinken returns to the Middle East: The US secretary of state visits
the region again this week, in a trip that will include stops in Israel, Egypt,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the West Bank.

Five more top stories
1. Exclusive: Iran used two of the UK’s biggest banks to covertly move money around
the world as part of a vast sanctions-evasion scheme backed by Tehran’s intelligence services.
Lloyds and Santander UK provided accounts to British front companies secretly owned by a
sanctioned Iranian petrochemicals company based near Buckingham Palace, according to
documents seen by the Financial Times. Here’s how the scheme worked.

US-Iran tensions: The US has warned that it will keep targeting Iranianaligned militants after it carried out two of its biggest waves of strikes since
the Israel-Hamas war triggered hostilities across the Middle East.
2. Taylor Swift made history last night by winning music’s most coveted prize, album
of the year, for a fourth time — becoming the first artist to do so since the Grammy Awards
were created in the 1950s and leaping ahead of legends such as Frank Sinatra. Swift, whose sales
made up an estimated 2 per cent of the entire US music business last year, is bigger than the entire
genre of jazz or classical music. Read more on the music industry’s biggest night of the year.
3. A compromise bill that would renew US aid to Ukraine and tighten immigration
rules at the southern border with Mexico could be voted on by US Senators as early
as this week. Chuck Schumer, leader of the Democratic majority in the upper chamber of
Congress, released the text of the compromise legislation yesterday after weeks of fraught
negotiations. Read more on what is a big test for President Joe Biden.

4. A mining start-up backed by Bill Gates and Jeff Bezos said it had discovered a vast
copper deposit in Zambia. Copper is vital as the west moves to decarbonise its economies and
is used in everything from cars to power transmission systems. KoBold Metals said the Mingomba
site in the northern Copperbelt province in Zambia would become one of the world’s top three
high-grade copper mines. KoBold used artificial intelligence to make the discovery.
5. President Nayib Bukele, the authoritarian leader of El Salvador, claimed victory
yesterday in the country’s presidential election and said his party had won almost all seats in
congress before the official results were declared. In a post on social media site X on Sunday,
Bukele said his “numbers” showed he had won the presidential election with more than 85 per cent
of the vote and that his Nuevas Ideas party had at least 58 of the 60 seats in congress. The result
makes Bukele probably the first Salvadorean president re-elected since the 1930s.

The Big Read

The physical scars left by the 7.8-magnitude quake and aftershocks a year ago are everywhere in Antakya, Turkey, where half the
buildings were destroyed © Ozan Kose/AFP/Getty Images

A year on, many people in Turkey’s shattered earthquake zone still live in temporary shelters
despite President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s pledge to “heal the wounds” within 12 months. Our
reporter Adam Samson visits Antakya, capital of Hatay province, where residents say despite
outward signs of progress, they face problems accessing clean water and other basic needs. Read
his report.

We’re also reading . . .
Delaware vs Musk: The billionaire’s threat to move Tesla’s legal home
has revived debate over the dominance of the small, mid-Atlantic state and
its courts over corporate America.
Private equity: The industry has evolved in the past three decades and
cannot be caricatured homogenously as short-termist, debt-addicted assetstrippers, writes Patrick Jenkins.
Antitrust: Rana Foroohar highlights fundamental differences between US
and European policy in dealing with the concentration of corporate power.

Chart of the day

PLAY | 00:20

© FT • Source: Nasa
Countries across South America are experiencing drought conditions and the spread of wildfires, as
the continent grapples with a double whammy of high temperatures and low rainfall. Data from
Nasa shows two-thirds of South America has much drier soil conditions than usual. Chile’s
president declared a state of emergency yesterday.

Take a break from the news
American composer Steve Reich has been influencing the course of modern music for nearly six
decades. He sat down for Lunch with the FT and discussed forging “minimalism” in 1960s
downtown New York — and why Stravinsky has been a life-long obsession.

Additional reporting by Tee Zhuo and Benjamin Wilhelm

Recommended newsletters for you
Working It — Everything you need to get ahead at work, in your inbox every Wednesday. Sign
up here
One Must-Read — The one piece of journalism you should read today. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article

Global Economy
World
Companies
FirstFT
Gordon Smith

