FT PROFESSIONAL

Markets Briefing Equities

Wall Street stocks edge lower ahead of Powell remarks and jobs report
Uncertainty over US monetary policy dissuades investors from making big bets while Chinese equities
rebound

The S&P 500 fell 0.2% on Tuesday while the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite gave up 0.6% © Spencer Platt/Getty Images

George Steer in London and Kate Duguid in New York
Published NOV 29 2022 | Updated NOV 29 2022, 16:18

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
US stocks dipped on Tuesday, but the moves were modest as investors held off on making big bets
ahead of remarks from Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell on Wednesday and November’s
employment report set to be released on Friday.

Wall Street’s benchmark S&P 500 fell 0.2 per cent in the New York session while the tech-heavy
Nasdaq Composite lost 0.6 per cent.
Powell will speak at The Brookings Institution amid uncertainty about the path forward for US
monetary policy as some signs of cooling inflation emerge. The uncertainty has been evident in the
minutes from the central bank’s November meeting as well as in recent remarks from officials
including New York Fed president John Williams, St Louis president James Bullard and San
Francisco president Mary Daly.
Investors in the futures market have priced in a roughly 70 per cent chance that the Fed will deliver
a 0.5 percentage point increase at its meeting in December after four consecutive 0.75 percentage
point moves.
“With Powell coming up tomorrow and the jobs coming, people are holding off on making big
moves,” said Lou Brien, a strategist at DRW Trading.
The labour department’s employment report on Friday is expected to show that the US added
200,000 jobs in November, according to a Bloomberg survey of economists, a slowdown from the
previous month. Williams at the New York Fed on Monday warned that US unemployment could
rise from its current level of 3.7 per cent to between 4.5 per cent and 5 per cent by the end of next
year.
The muted performance in US stocks contrasted with Chinese equities, which rebounded sharply
on Tuesday as investors wagered that Beijing would press on with easing its tough Covid-19
policies despite the government’s commitment to keeping its hardline measures.
Hong Kong’s Hang Seng index soared 5.2 per cent following a 1.6 per cent fall in the previous
session, while China’s CSI 300 added 3.1 per cent.
The moves came after the imposition of a fresh round of business closures and quarantines of close
coronavirus contacts in Shanghai, and as the country reels from widespread demonstrations
against President Xi Jinping’s stringent lockdown measures.

“The direction of reopening is very clear, in our view, and we don’t think the government will
double down on pandemic control measures,” said Xiangrong Yu, an analyst at Citi.
“We maintain our base case that reopening will gain momentum post the National People’s
Congress [in March] next year, and see higher risk of an accelerated reopening,” he said.

Although some of the “front-loading” by investors into Chinese equities with low valuations had
reversed thanks to “skittish” market sentiment, China was likely to stick with its zero-Covid
measures until at least next year, and despite the protests, said Mitul Kotecha, head of emerging
markets strategy at TD Securities.
“Ultimately, there’s nothing here yet that changes the perspective of investors,” Kotecha added.
Elsewhere in equity markets, Europe’s regional Stoxx 600 fell 0.1 per cent, having lost 0.6 per cent
on Monday, while London’s FTSE 100 added 0.5 per cent.

The two-year Treasury yield, which moves with interest rate expectations, rose 0.04 percentage
points to 4.48 per cent, while the benchmark 10-year yield gained 0.07 percentage points to 3.75
per cent.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Equities
Markets
Markets Briefing
George Steer
Kate Duguid

