FT PROFESSIONAL

White House Watch US politics & policy

Federal Reserve minutes reveal deep divide over December rate cut
Also in today’s newsletter, remarkable revelations at James Comey’s hearing

Minutes of the Fed’s October meeting showed ‘strongly differing views’ among policymakers on the need for a third interest rate cut
this year © Reuters

Stefania Palma in Washington
Published NOV 20 2025

This is an on-site version of the White House Watch newsletter. You can read the previous
edition here. Sign up for free here to get it on Tuesdays and Thursdays. Email us
at whitehousewatch@ft.com

Good morning and welcome to White House Watch. The most recent meeting of the Federal
Reserve’s policymakers has unveiled a schism on the direction of monetary policy at a delicate time
for the US economy. Also in today’s newsletter:

Donald Trump’s lavish welcome for Saudi Arabia’s crown prince
Lawrence Summers resigns from OpenAI board over Jeffrey Epstein emails
A tense court day in James Comey’s case
A record of the most recent meeting of the Fed’s policy-setting committee released yesterday
showed deep divisions among its members, highlighting a growing schism over the level of US
borrowing costs.
Minutes of the Fed’s October meeting showed “strongly differing views” among members of the
committee on the need for a third interest rate cut this year.
“In discussing the near-term course of monetary policy, participants expressed strongly differing
views about what policy decision would most likely be appropriate at the committee’s December
meeting,” said the Federal Open Market Committee minutes.
The minutes speak to the difference of views among Fed policymakers on the pace and scale of rate
cuts this year, as inflation increases and the labour market weakens.
The FOMC opted in October to lower rates by 0.25 percentage points for the second time this year.
But the vote saw a rare three-way split, with Stephen Miran, an ally of President Donald Trump,
backing a half-point cut, while Kansas City Fed president Jeff Schmid called for rates to be held
steady.
The Fed is set to face further difficulty in making its decision after the Bureau of Labor Statistics
said yesterday that it would not release a jobs report for October. It did, however, release the
previous month’s report, which showed that 119,000 jobs were created in September in a surprise
rebound and the unemployment rate rose to 4.4 per cent, its highest level in four years.
Things have been further complicated by the recent government shutdown, prompting some
policymakers to call for a more cautious approach until a clearer picture emerges.

Doubts had already been growing on Wall Street about whether the Fed would continue to reduce
borrowing costs at its next meeting.
The probability of another quarter-point cut in December had fallen from a near certainty to about
30 per cent over the past month, according to CME Group data, as several senior Fed officials
voiced their opposition to such a move.
Join us in December for the ninth edition of The Global Boardroom, the Financial Times’ awardwinning digital conference. The event will bring together more than 100 leaders in business,
policy and finance including Bank of England Governor Andrew Bailey and Qualcomm CFO
Akash Palkhiwala for three days of in-depth analysis and discussion. Register here.

The latest headlines
The fallout from the release of files linked to the late sex offender Jeffrey
Epstein continues. Lawrence Summers, former US Treasury secretary, has
stepped down from the board of OpenAI after emails revealed he solicited
advice from Epstein on pursuing a relationship with a female mentee.
Trump’s Oval Office welcome for Saudi Arabia’s Crown Prince Mohammed
bin Salman this week was all fanfare. The US president arranged a 21-gun
salute, a sprawling Marine Corps band and a fighter jet fly-past. He also
threatened American journalists who might offend his guest.
As Trump rolled out a lavish welcome for the Saudi crown prince, rare
earths group MP Materials said it was partnering with the US military and
Saudi Arabia’s state mining company to build a processing facility in the
Gulf kingdom.
The Trump administration and Russian officials have drawn up a sweeping
new proposal to end Russia’s war in Ukraine. The plan, which is still at a
framework stage, would include major concessions by Kyiv.

What we’re hearing
I made my way to Alexandria, Virginia, yesterday for a hearing in the federal case against former
FBI director James Comey, who is accused of lying to and obstructing Congress.
The court heard oral arguments for a motion to dismiss filed by Comey, who alleges that the
government is pursuing a “vindictive prosecution” against him — accusations that federal
prosecutors reject. Comey has pleaded not guilty.
This is one of three criminal cases filed in recent weeks by the US Department of Justice against
Donald Trump’s perceived opponents, after he asked that legal action be taken against them.
These cases, critics argue, risk undermining the independence of the DoJ and the country’s
separation of powers. But the justice department rejects accusations of political interference.
Things in Virginia grew quite tense when Michael Nachmanoff, the federal judge presiding over
Comey’s case, pressed DoJ lawyer Nathaniel Lemons on exactly how the government had obtained
the indictment against the ex-FBI director.
The case is based on a second version of the indictment that was crafted after the grand jury
declined to back one of the three charges originally presented to the panel.
Grand jurors must vote to grant indictments. But when asked if the second indictment had never
been shown to the entire grand jury, Lemons told Nachmanoff: “Yes, that’s my understanding”.
Only the foreperson officially approved the final document, he added.
In another stunning moment during the hearing, Nachmanoff asked Lindsey Halligan, the US
attorney who brought the case, to take the podium and answer his questions. She confirmed that
the full grand jury did not see the revised — and final — indictment.
These remarkable revelations could scupper the entire case — a notion that Michael Dreeben, a
lawyer representing Comey, seized upon immediately in court.

Comey has filed a separate motion to dismiss that challenges the legality of Halligan’s
appointment, which came mere days before he was charged. She was appointed after her
predecessor refused to bring this case — and after Trump, in a social media post, urged US
attorney-general Pam Bondi to give Halligan the job.
Judges in Virginia have now heard oral arguments for both these motions. Their upcoming rulings
could make or break one of the most high-profile criminal cases of Trump’s second presidency.

Recommended newsletters for you
FT Exclusive — Be the first to see exclusive FT scoops, features, analysis and investigations.
Sign up here
US Top Stories — The latest US top stories, from markets to geopolitics. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US politics & policy
US interest rates
Federal Reserve
White House Watch
Stefania Palma

