FT PROFESSIONAL

Markets Briefing US Treasury bonds

Yield on 10-year Treasury dips to lowest in four months
US government bonds rally as traders cut bets on tighter Fed policy

The Fed’s ultra-loose monetary policies, including historically-low interest rates and a massive bond-buying programme, have been
key elements in keeping borrowing costs low and lifting other asset prices © REUTERS

Joe Rennison and Eric Platt in New York
Published JUL 6 2021 | Updated JUL 6 2021, 16:20

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
US government bonds rallied on Tuesday, pushing the 10-year yield to the lowest level in four
months, as investors unwound bets for tighter monetary policy and reacted to a disappointing
survey on the services sector.

The yield on the benchmark 10-year note fell 0.07 percentage points to 1.36 per cent, its lowest
level since late February when fears of a rapid pick-up in inflation began to reverberate through
financial markets.
The 10-year yield, which moves inversely to its price, surged as high as 1.77 per cent earlier this
year as investors began to anticipate a more aggressive response from the Federal Reserve to tame
rising inflation.
The moves on Tuesday added fuel to a rally in long-dated US Treasuries that began on Friday,
when government data showed US hiring had accelerated, but not at a pace sufficient to prompt a
policy shift by the central bank. The Fed’s ultra-loose monetary policies, including historically-low
interest rates and a massive bond-buying programme, have been key elements in keeping
borrowing costs low and lifting other asset prices.
Data published on Tuesday from the Institute for Supply Management, which tracks activity in the
service sector, intensified the rush into government debt, which tends to perform well during times
of heightened uncertainty. The figures showed business and employment conditions in the service
industry weakened in June from the previous month, with the ISM citing company comments that
it was difficult to find qualified candidates to fill open positions.

“The ISM reading just added more motivation to extend the move in Treasury yields lower,” said
Ian Lyngen, an interest rate strategist at BMO Capital Markets. “A big portion of what we are
seeing is a capitulation of the higher rates thesis.”
Market measures of expected future inflation in the country also slipped on Tuesday, with the socalled 10-year break-even rate declining to 2.33 per cent. Yields on other long-term Treasuries,
including the 20- and 30-year bonds also fell as traders shifted into the debt. The drop pushed the
difference in yields between policy-sensitive two-year notes and 10-year notes towards the lowest
level since February.
The moves ricocheted to the $50tn US stock market, where shares of big industrial goods
companies, oil majors and large banks slid in value. The three sectors had been buoyed this year by
expectations of faster growth, with large banks also rising as investors bet higher rates would help
lift earnings. The benchmark S&P 500 stocks index slid 0.7 per cent, before moderating later in the
afternoon to close 0.2 per cent lower for the day.

“As the equity market got slammed, the Treasury market caught a bid,” said Andrew Brenner, head
of international fixed income at National Alliance Securities.
Investors rotated into big tech groups like Apple and Oracle — companies that have prospered
during the pandemic and which are seen as less sensitive to economic fluctuations. The move
helped contain losses on the Nasdaq Composite, which finished 0.2 per cent higher for the day.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US Treasury bonds
US equities
Equities
Markets
Institute for Supply Management

