FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Insight & Comment

Long-dated US bonds offer investors hope
Central banks are now sitting on large unrealised losses

JOHN REDWOOD

© Graeme Sloan/Sipa USA/Reuters

John Redwood
Published DEC 8 2022

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
It’s been a bad year for bonds and shares. We have seen markets dominated by the actions of the
leading central banks as they have struggled to adjust to the new reality of high and rising inflation.

I kept the bond part of the portfolio in short-dated index-linked bonds and in cash and near cash
for much of the year, waiting for the US Federal Reserve and the other leading central banks to get
on with increasing interest rates and forcing bond prices down.
More recently I have put money into longer-dated US Treasuries as the yields offer better value.
Earlier, I took the share portfolio out of stocks on the tech-orientated Nasdaq and cut exposure to
the growth sectors that were subsequently hit hard in the sell-off.
The share part of the portfolio has lost a bit less by holding a better diversified world share
exposure. But it was still affected by the big change of mood and outlook and the widespread
global share market falls. The FT portfolio as a whole was down 11.4 per cent for the year, on
December 1.
The year 2022 has reminded investors how dependent asset values are on supportive central
banks. The great bull runs of recent years were fuelled by huge bond purchase programmes by the
central banks, which paid ever- crazier prices to depress interest rates to around zero.
I never saw the advantage of buying bonds that offered no income in the hope someone would buy
them from you for an even higher price. The central banks bought many bonds well above their
repayment value. This means these banks are now sitting on large unrealised losses which will
crystallise when they sell their bonds in the market in so-called quantitative tightening
programmes, or when the bonds are repaid on maturity.
The central banks are also losing money by holding the bonds, as the income they receive on them
is now less than the interest they have to pay out on the reserves deposited with them by the
commercial banks. These reserves are inflated by the cost of the bonds the central banks bought
being now reflected in commercial bank deposits.
The Fed and the European Central Bank were slow to stop the bond buying and they have been
slow to get interest rates up to the levels needed to bring inflation down to the 2 per cent target.

This has strung out the misery in the markets and led to volatility around speculation on just how
high rates will have to go and for how long. The recent Santa rally has come from many investors
hoping that the Fed is nearing peak rates and will have to start to reduce borrowing costs as early
as sometime next year in response to economic slowdown or recession.
It is true that money supply has lurched from far too expansionary to not growing at all. At the
same time the US regulators are looking at requiring commercial banks to hold more capital, to
make it more difficult for people and businesses to borrow. It should not take much more Fed
action to bring price rises down. They need to avoid overdoing the severity of their policy. A
slowdown followed by a pause in rate rises will be needed in the new year.
The refusal of the advanced country central banks to take money and credit growth seriously has
added to the magnitude of the errors they made over inflation.
While, as the banks say, Russian president Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine led to a big spike
in energy prices, inflation was well above target before the war began.
In China and Japan inflation has stayed much lower than in the US and Europe despite those
countries being large energy importers. It is true the velocity of circulation or frequency of use of
money can vary and might offset changes in the quantity, but it does appear that the places that
boosted money and credit most now have higher inflation. We are all paying a high price for the
inflationary errors.
Establishment wisdom tells us that central banks cannot go bust. That is just as well, as many of
them have unrealised losses on their bonds many times their capital base. It is likely various
central banks will be reporting negative capital as the bonds repay or are sold at a loss.
The theory goes that they can always create money to pay their bills, unlike any other company
which needs to replenish share capital and reserves or cease trading.
Different accounting treatments will be used. The Bank of England has no problem because it will
receive cash for all the losses made from the Treasury, which constantly tops up its capital.

The Fed has said it will report the losses and create a deferred asset on its balance sheet to offset
them. This is said to represent future profits it expects to make sometime. The European Central
Bank will require the national central banks in the Euro system to absorb most of the losses. If
necessary these banks will have to be recapitalised by their governments.
Eurozone officials say there is now a transmission protection instrument available. This would
allow the ECB to return to buying bonds in countries facing bond price falls and high interest rates
compared to other member states. They claim they would not use this to help finance any
government refusing to accept the disciplines of the EU and eurozone over deficits and general
economic policy.
These pressures are likely to make the ECB more wary of raising rates too much and more
reluctant than the US to go selling lots of bonds at a loss.
European rates remain unrealistically low for the

Bonds in the US now offer
better value. I will add more to
the portfolio as we approach
the slowdown and the coming
pause in US rate rises
John Redwood

inflationary circumstances. Policy will be more
guided by keeping the euro states on side, by trying
to avoid big divergences in rates between different
countries, and by a reluctance to worsen the
downturn.
In contrast, the US remains wedded to hawkish
words and deeds to get inflation down quickly. Next

year it is very likely political priorities will evolve in the US to show more concern about incomes,
jobs and activity, which will lead to a mellowing at the Fed.
As the old year draws to an end, weary investors are looking for better prospects next year. Bonds
in the US now offer better value. I will add more to the portfolio as we approach the slowdown and
the coming pause in US rate rises.
Shares are well down and pointing to the downturn in growth and profits to come. January will see
more debate about when governments shift from mainly fighting inflation, to combating a
downturn that threatens to be too long and too deep.

It will be time to consider the share portfolio when we have a bit more data on the extent and
nature of the downturn. We should still expect downward revisions to forecasts of profits as more
sectors experience the kind of problems we can clearly see in falling US housing starts and in home
sales numbers.
Sir John Redwood is chief global strategist for Charles Stanley. The FT Fund is a dummy
portfolio intended to demonstrate how investors can use a wide range of ETFs to gain exposure
to global stock markets while keeping down the costs of investing. john.redwood@ft.com

The Redwood fund — December 7 2022
Name

% Wgt (P)

Ishares Core MSCI World UCITS ETF GBP Hgd (Dist)

20.99%

Cash Account [GBP]

18.55%

iShares $ Short Duration Corporate Bond (USD) ETF

11.53%

XTRACKERS S&P 500 UCITS ETF

5.67%

iShares $ TIPS 0-5 UCITS ETF GBP Hedged

5.64%

iShares $ Treasury Bond 20+yr UCITS ETF USD D

4.78%

iShares $ Treasury Bond 7-10 (USD) ETF

4.43%

Lyxor FTSE Actuaries UK Gilts Inflation Linked (DR) UCITS ETF D

4.21%

Vanguard FTSE 250 UCITS ETF GBP Dist

4.17%

X-trackers MSCI Taiwan ETF

4.01%

L&G All Stocks Index-Linked Gilt Index I Acc

3.22%

SPDR BofA ML 0-5 Yr EM $ Govt Bd UCITS ETF

2.16%

iShares Global Clean Energy

2.13%

Source: Charles Stanley

Name

% Wgt (P)

Legal & General ROBO GI Robotics and Automation UCITS ETF

1.86%

Ishares Core MSCI EM IMI UCITS ETF USD Acc

1.84%

Legal & General Cyber Security UCITS ETF

1.80%

L&G H d

1 54%

E

UCITS ETF

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
John Redwood
Bonds
Central banks
Financials
Insight & Comment

