FT PROFESSIONAL

Markets Briefing Equities

US equities slide as investors turn cautious on outlook for interest rates
Traders wary after comments from Federal Reserve officials

US Fed chair Jay Powell: ‘[The jobs data] shows you why we think this will be a process that takes a significant period of time . . . the
labour market is extraordinarily strong’ © Win McNamee/Getty Images

Martha Muir in London and Jaren Kerr in New York
Published FEB 8 2023 | Updated FEB 8 2023, 16:31

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
US equities fell on Wednesday as investors turned cautious on comments from Federal Reserve
officials that US interest rates would have to rise to combat inflation.
The blue-chip S&P 500 ended 1.1 per cent lower as traders’ concerns lingered that rates may rise
more than they expected since last week’s blockbuster US jobs report.

The headline number of the payrolls report released last Friday was far higher than economists
expected and led to a sell-off in US stocks and bonds.
Fed chair Jay Powell on Tuesday stressed the need for further rate rises to cool the economy. US
markets initially responded positively to Powell’s comments. On the same day, Minneapolis Fed
president Neel Kashkari said that ballooning jobs growth was proof that the Fed needed to “raise
rates aggressively”.
The dollar index, a measure of the US currency’s strength against a basket of six peers, pared early
gains to add 0.1 per cent, while the yield on the 10-year Treasuries was down 0.05 percentage
points at 3.63 per cent. The yield on two-year Treasuries ticked down 0.03 percentage points to
4.44 per cent.
Traders said there may be more clarity on the Fed’s next move with the publication of consumer
price index, retail and inflation data next week.
“It’s evident now that the Fed is really data-dependent. All eyes will be on the CPI print next
Tuesday. It’s evident that disinflation has begun but services have yet to follow,” said Sam Gunter,
head of foreign exchange trading at Britannia Global Markets.
The tech-heavy Nasdaq shed 1.7 per cent, weighed down by an 7.4 per cent fall for Google parent
Alphabet after a technology glitch on its new artificial intelligence software disappointed investors.

Equities in Europe gave up early gains as US markets headed lower. The benchmark Stoxx 600
finished 0.3 per cent higher, while Germany’s Dax closed up 0.6 per cent. The FTSE 100 rose 0.3
per cent, hitting an intraday record high before easing back.
“Europe has a natural correlation with the United States, so when sentiment there improves it
drives sentiment across European markets,” said Mobeen Tahir, director of macroeconomic
research and tactical solutions at WisdomTree Europe. “Our assessment is that stock markets are
starting to realise that policy tightening is not necessarily crippling the economy. Markets are
learning to live with higher rates, a profound change from last year.”
Yields on 10-year German government bonds fell slightly to 2.34 per cent. Separately, the
European Central Bank said it would cut the maximum rate it paid on government deposits to
encourage investors to put their money in the market.

On commodities markets, Brent crude, the international benchmark, pared early gains to settle 1.7
per cent higher at $85.09 a barrel, while its US counterpart, WTI, increased 1.7 per cent to $78.47 a
barrel.
In Asia, the Hang Seng index closed flat, down less than 0.1 per cent, while the Chinese CSI 300 fell
0.4 per cent.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Currencies
Sovereign bonds
European equities
US inflation
US interest rates

