FT PROFESSIONAL

Unhedged Markets

Everyone calm down about CPI
Plus, a very large taxi company becomes profitable

© FT montage/Bloomberg

Robert Armstrong and Ethan Wu
Published FEB 14 2024

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
This article is an on-site version of our Unhedged newsletter. Sign up here to get the newsletter
sent straight to your inbox every weekday

Good morning. A day after we questioned whether Arm was properly an AI stock, the shares fell 20
per cent. Apologies! More generally, markets were shaken by yesterday’s consumer price index
data. Unhedged, on the other hand, is taking it in stride, as you will see below. Email us:
robert.armstrong@ft.com and ethan.wu@ft.com.

Reserving judgment on inflation
Markets took yesterday’s hotter-than-expected CPI inflation report hard. The two-year Treasury
yield rose 17 basis points. That sent the S&P 500 down 1 per cent, and the small-cap Russell 2000
down 4 per cent. Futures markets now price in fewer than four 25bp interest rate cuts in 2024,
down from five a week ago.
This looks like an overreaction to us, but look at it from the bond market’s point of view. The
Federal Reserve can wait for more data before making a call; traders can’t. Yesterday’s CPI
numbers showed core inflation jutting higher, rising 0.4 per cent on strong increases in services
prices. “Supercore” inflation (core services ex-shelter) was up a blistering 0.9 per cent. This fits
with a recent uptrend in the three-month moving average of core CPI, putting it close to 4 per cent
annualised (see chart below). It makes sense that traders would give more weight to the possibility
of rising inflation than they were on Monday.

But it’s just one month. In context, the numbers look less scary. Consider:

Inflation expectations, which the Fed thinks are the most important single
input to realised inflation, are falling. Consumer survey numbers released
on Monday by the New York Fed showed three-year-ahead expectations
falling to 2.4 per cent from 2.6 per cent. Across a breadth of measures,
including market inflation pricing and professional forecaster surveys,
expectations are anchored and declining:
January inflation reports tend to be volatile. Many employment and supplier contracts update at
the beginning of the year. Spencer Hill of Goldman Sachs (who forecasted yesterday’s core CPI
reading almost exactly) spots this “January effect” in labour-intensive price categories such as
medical services, personal care and daycare, all of which rose 0.7 per cent. This should fall away in
February, he thinks.

Recent news is much better for personal consumption expenditure inflation, which is what the Fed
targets. Even if core PCE prices, published at the end of the month, come in hot, the three-month
and six-month trends appear benign. In the chart below, we use Goldman’s (relatively pessimistic)
forecast for a 4.2 per cent annualised rise in core PCE inflation in January. That would lift the
recent trend above 2 per cent, but not by too much:

Shelter inflation should still cool further, though the timing is anyone’s
guess. It’s well known that official rent inflation data lags rents on newly
signed leases, which have plummeted. When this inflation surge began, we
were told the lag was on the order of nine to 12 months. That proved wrong.
But it would be odd indeed if rental inflation did not converge to current
market rents eventually. A soothing chart from Pantheon Macroeconomics
(the green line refers to an abrupt 0.6 per cent jump in homeowners’
imputed rents):
Put simply: we are more relaxed than the bond market. We’ve long argued that inflation would
grind down slowly but that it would be bumpy. That still looks right. The Fed, which has all but
sworn off a March cut, has months to collect data, and won’t change its view based on one noisy
report. If February is similarly hot, that will be a different story. For now, reserve judgment. (Ethan
Wu)

Uber: still a taxi company? (Revisited)
Uber will hold an investor update call this morning. Management will discuss strategy and capital
allocation plans, and we’ll be listening closely. Unhedged has been mostly sceptical about Uber.
Specifically, we’ve taken the view that at maturity, Uber will have the returns of a very large but
capital-intensive taxi company, not a big tech company:

[Uber] can’t charge a big premium over what it costs to pay the drivers and
cover the wear and tear on the cars. Even where it has a monopoly or
duopoly position in ride-hailing, it is not clear that its service has clear
cost/speed/comfort/convenience advantages over alternatives such as
bicycles, buses, subways and local car services. Profits much above Uber’s
cost of capital, on this argument, seem unlikely to ever materialise.
Yes, there has been a lot of talk about how Uber is profitable now, and even generates free cash
flow. We’ve been sceptical about this, too. Uber engages in the widespread and legal, but essentially
dishonest, practice of not including stock-based compensation expense in adjusted earnings. And
heavy stock-based compensation inflates free cash flow, too:

Imagine a company that issues new shares to the public, then uses the cash
raised to pay employees. One would not be tempted to exclude that cash
expenditure from free cash flow. But in the case where the company cuts out
the public, and just gives the shares to employees directly, the same
economic value is being given away.
But wait! In 2023, Uber reported positive true free cash flow, operating cash flow after both capital
expenses and stock-based comp, of $1.4bn last year:

Meanwhile, Uber’s smaller competitor, Lyft, reported earnings last night, and said they, too,
expected positive free cash flow next year (not true free cash flow, of course). The industry looks to
be firming up.
That Uber is profitable in cash terms is a big deal. That does not, however, resolve the question of
whether it is just a big taxi company. Yes, it generates cash. But its returns are still below that of
traditional transport companies. Uber’s return on capital last year was 3.1 per cent, according to
S&P Capital IQ (ROC is basically after-tax profit divided by shareholders’ equity plus debt). JB
Hunt, which is a big old capital-intensive diesel-burning trucking company that owns its own
trucks, earned 11 per cent (and that was its worst year in more than two decades; trucking is in a
slump). That’s a wildly imperfect comparison, but it’s close enough to show that 15 years into its
existence, Uber’s profits still look nothing like a technology company’s (Alphabet and Meta’s
returns are close to 20 per cent).

The hard question is: now that Uber has cut expenses and raised prices in its core ride-sharing
(“Mobility”) business, what is its growth rate? Uber booked almost $70bn in rides last year and
returns were low. Presumably, the way to high returns is by getting bigger still. How quickly can
that happen? Analysts feel the uncertainty. Here is Morgan Stanley’s Brian Nowak, being
diplomatic but using lots of capital letters:

The Market Needs Improved Rides Disclosure to Better Understand What is
Informing UBER’s Investment Decisions: We have broken down Uber’s
Mobility Gross Bookings multiple ways, including high frequency vs low
frequency users, Core UberX vs Non-UberX, rideshare use cases, new
geographies . . . all in an attempt to gain increasing confidence in the scale
and durability of forward Mobility growth . . . the multiyear path of forward
Mobility growth remains the point of greatest uncertainty in our
conversations with investors.
Our scepticism about Uber has been thawed a bit by the appearance of nice, warm free cash flow.
But we still don’t understand why the business would produce the increasing returns to scale that
many tech companies enjoy. What will make the unit cost of incremental sales fall from here?
Where is Uber’s exclusive intellectual property? Is urban transport really winner-take-most? Until
we see more evidence, we’ll continue to see Uber as a fast growing, moderately profitable transport
company. There is nothing wrong with investing in a transport company, of course — so long as
you know that is what you are investing in.

One good read
Why not own only stocks?

FT Unhedged podcast

Can’t get enough of Unhedged? Listen to our
new podcast, hosted by Ethan Wu and Katie
Martin, for a 15-minute dive into the latest
markets news and financial headlines, twice a
week. Catch up on past editions of the
newsletter here.

Recommended newsletters for you
Swamp Notes — Expert insight on the intersection of money and power in US politics. Sign up
here
Due Diligence — Top stories from the world of corporate finance. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Gig economy
US economy
US inflation
Markets
Uber Technologies Inc

