FT PROFESSIONAL

Markets Briefing Equities

Global stocks rise ahead of US inflation report
Britain’s FTSE 100 moved within striking distance of an all-time high on hopes that inflation has peaked

Equity markets have risen despite warnings from the US Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank, pictured, that interest rates
have further to climb © Thomas Lohnes/Getty Images

Jaren Kerr in New York and George Steer in London
Published JAN 11 2023 | Updated JAN 11 2023, 16:59

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
US stocks rose as investors prepared for inflation data that analysts expect to show a slowdown in
domestic price growth, which could buoy the hopes of traders despite hawkish messaging from the
Federal Reserve.

On Wall Street, the blue-chip S&P 500 closed 1.3 per cent higher on Wednesday, while the techheavy Nasdaq Composite added 1.8 per cent. It marked the first time in about three weeks the S&P
500 had notched back-to-back daily gains, while the Nasdaq Composite scored its first four-day
winning streak in four months.
The gains come ahead of US inflation data due to be released on Thursday morning. Analysts
expect the headline consumer price index will moderate to 6.5 per cent in December, down from
7.1 per cent in November. Investors have seized on economic data that have shown a slowdown in
price growth and softness in a still-tight US labour market, even though members of the Fed this
week reiterated their intention to hold the federal funds rate at a restrictive level to stamp out high
inflation.
“More risk-tolerant investors can look to anticipate this turn [in monetary policy] by phasing into
markets, seeking early winners from a global improvement in sentiment, and identifying
beneficiaries from China’s reopening,” Mark Haefele, chief investment officer at UBS Global
Wealth Management, wrote on Tuesday. “However, we don’t believe we have yet reached the
inflection point in policy or economic growth.”
Across the Atlantic, Britain’s FTSE 100 moved within striking distance of an all-time high as
growing investor optimism that inflation had peaked boosted US and European stocks.
The UK’s benchmark stock index rose 0.4 per cent, leaving it within about 2 per cent of the historic
peak it reached in May 2018.
The gains in the London market echoed other regional bourses, with the regional Stoxx Europe
600 adding 0.4 per cent and Germany’s Dax rallying 1.2 per cent.
UK markets lagged behind the big US equity rally in 2020 and 2021, which was led by high-flying
growth stocks such as Apple, Alphabet and Tesla. But the FTSE 100 dodged the carnage in global
equities last year because it is filled with the type of companies that prospered in an environment
where interest rates and energy prices were rising.

Shell, the Anglo-Dutch oil major that is the second-biggest company on the London Stock
Exchange, gained 43 per cent last year. HSBC, the banking heavyweight, gained 15 per cent as
higher interest rates boosted its profits. In dollar terms, their gains would have been smaller, at 28
per cent and 3 per cent, respectively.
The rallies contrasted sharply with big US companies, with the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite
shedding a third of its value last year.

Equity markets on both sides of the Atlantic have advanced this year on the back of signs inflation
in many of the world’s biggest economies is softening and despite warnings from the Fed and the
European Central Bank that interest rates have further to climb.
Figures out on Thursday are expected to show that US consumer price growth continued to slow in
December. Inflation also appears to have peaked in Europe, with price growth slowing in France,
Germany and Spain.

Central bank officials insist it would be premature to pause their monetary tightening campaigns.
Projections published in December show most Fed officials expecting the fed funds rate to peak at
between 5 per cent and 5.25 per cent, up from its current level of between 4.25 per cent and 4.5 per
cent. ECB president Christine Lagarde said in December that markets should expect rates to rise
“at a 50-basis-point pace for a period of time”.
The size of future interest rate increases — as well as the depth of the recessions expected in
Europe and the US later this year — now dominates debate.
“A friendly December [consumer prices index] print sets up for a 25bp hike and that could very
well prove to be the end for this cycle,” said Steven Blitz, chief US economist at TS Lombard.
“Beyond the near term, mild recession or no recession, inflation will be settling closer to 3 per cent
than 2 per cent, owing to the structural imbalance in the labour market.”
Jobs growth in the world’s biggest economy slowed for a fifth consecutive month in December,
while wage growth declined to 4.6 per cent and the unemployment rate fell to a historic low. Fed
officials have made it clear that inflation continuing to cool depends to a large extent on
unemployment rising later this year, even as the economy grapples with worker shortages in
service sectors such as hospitality and travel.
In Asia, Hong Kong’s Hang Seng index rose 0.5 per cent, taking its gains since the start of
November to 45 per cent. China’s CSI 300 index of Shanghai- and Shenzhen-listed stocks fell 0.2
per cent.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
European equities
US equities

Equities
Markets Briefing

