FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Unhedged

Markets don’t believe Jay Powell
But he still holds the policy levers

ROBERT ARMSTRONG

© Financial Times

Robert Armstrong and Ethan Wu
Published DEC 15 2022

This article is an on-site version of our Unhedged newsletter. Sign up here to get the newsletter
sent straight to your inbox every weekday

Good morning. Cheers to Morocco for a remarkable run and for putting up a valiant showing
against France yesterday. Unhedged will be watching the finals as we write on Sunday. Send us
your World Cup predictions: robert.armstrong@ft.com and ethan.wu@ft.com.

The Fed
There was a very brief moment when it looked like the Federal Reserve had managed to deliver a
surprise. It wasn’t the 50 basis point rate increase, which was locked in beforehand and was
delivered in a statement identical to last month’s. The accompanying economic projections came
with a little spice, though: a half-point increase in the outlook for year-end 2023 rates, to 5.1 per
cent, even as the projected GDP growth rate was brought down. Of the 19 members on the open
market committee, 17 thought that rate should be above five. Back in September, zero did.
The context for this hawkish message was, first, two consecutive CPI inflation reports that had
surprised to the downside and, second, a notable loosening of financial conditions — from stock
prices to mortgage rates — over the past month or two. Against that backdrop, the message from
the central bank was: slow your roll, markets, we ain’t done yet.
Initially, markets flinched. The S&P 500 fell 2 per cent between the release of the statement and
the opening minutes of Jay Powell’s news conference half an hour later. The two-year bond, a
barometer of policy rate expectations, rose 12 basis points. Not huge moves, but the market was
standing to attention, at least.
It didn’t last. As the press conference went on, the market took back losses. The two-year went
straight back to sleep, closing the day just about where it started. On Tuesday afternoon, the
futures market’s bet was that the policy rate would peak under five, and that the Fed would then
make two, 25-basis point rate cuts in the second half of next year. Yesterday afternoon, it was
making precisely the same bet.
In other words, the market looked Powell right in the eye and said: we don’t believe you.
Is this a problem? It can only be frustrating for Powell and his colleagues, but if they decide that
financial conditions really are too loose, there is a solution at hand: a rate increase. The market’s
problem is that it might be wrong, either about what inflation will do or how the Fed will react to it,
or both. And if that is so, the only solution is lower asset prices.

Put aside, for now, the question whether the market has a realistic estimate of inflation in 2023 (we
think it’s pricing in a pretty optimistic scenario, but inflation forecasting is very hard). Focus,
instead, on the market’s implied view of what the Fed will have to do to get inflation down, and the
central bank’s own view.
As already stated, the futures market expects the Fed to start easing policy in the second half of
next year. Bond markets expect inflation to come down fast. Near-term break-even inflation is at
2.3 per cent and falling:

There is one perfectly plausible scenario under which inflation would fall fast and the Fed would
cut rates: a recession. But markets are not expecting a recession. The price/earnings ratio on the
S&P 500 is back to its pre-pandemic level, that is, historically quite middling:

Junk bond spreads are not recessionary either. Here’s triple-Cs:

What the market sees coming, in other words, is the Fed cutting rates next year because inflation
falls quickly without help from a serious economic contraction.
The contrast with Powell’s view is stark. Yesterday he restated his tripartite inflation framework,
rolled out last month: goods, shelter, and non-shelter core services. He emphasised that the Fed’s
decisive battle will be in the last category. Crucially, he believes these prices are tightly linked to the
labour market. The problem, in Powell’s words, is that “it feels like we have a structural labour
shortage out there”, which he pinned on accelerated retirements, Covid-19 deaths and a drop in
migration.
He hearkened back to a chart he showed last month, showing the labour supply 3.5mn workers
short of demand:

He also alluded to anecdata, such as that collected in the Fed’s Beige Book, suggesting employers
remain desperate for workers, even in the face of a slowdown. A recent selection:

[From the Philly Fed:] Firms from many sectors reported preparations for a
potential recession but also remain hesitant to lay off employees, given
recent hiring difficulties
[Atlanta Fed:] Finding qualified candidates was reported as nearly
impossible, so firms increased investments in training new hires
[Richmond Fed:] The supply of labour remained tight with several contacts
noting difficulties finding workers with necessary skills. One company that
was looking to hire an experienced worker decided to hire an entry-level
worker instead and pay for their training.
The Fed, in sum, is worried about a category of inflation that won’t fall until labour market
conditions get worse for workers, which they are a very long way from doing. And since labour
supply probably won’t expand suddenly (Congress does not seem keen on tons more immigration),
labour demand will have to fall.

The market view that inflation glides down, rates get cut and the US sidesteps a recession looks
inconsistent with Powell’s view of the economy. In his framework, for the labour supply-demand
gap to close, rates have to weigh on demand — meaning higher rates for longer. The world where
the Fed, highly attuned to loosening policy too soon, starts cutting is a world where the economy is
entering recession.
Maybe the market has figured out something Powell hasn’t, like inflation’s fall being much faster
than its rise. At a minimum, they are clearly operating with different reaction functions. But
remember: the Fed chair has the power here. He who holds the policy levers has more sway over
markets than they do over him. That markets disagree with Powell’s outlook is fine, but it is
ultimately a gamble. If he presses on, investors will get stuck holding the bag. (Armstrong & Wu)

One good read
Chat bots come for the sell side.

Recommended newsletters for you
Cryptofinance — Scott Chipolina filters out the noise of the global cryptocurrency industry.
Sign up here
Swamp Notes — Expert insight on the intersection of money and power in US politics. Sign up
here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Robert Armstrong
Unhedged
US economy
Federal Reserve

Jerome H. Powell

