FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Unhedged

Inflation is more than tariffs
Plus, will Korean and Japanese investments in the US happen?

ROBERT ARMSTRONG

© FT montage/AP

Robert Armstrong & Hakyung Kim
Published SEP 29 2025

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
This article is an on-site version of our Unhedged newsletter. Premium subscribers can sign up
here to get the newsletter delivered every weekday. Standard subscribers can upgrade to
Premium here, or explore all FT newsletters

Good morning. Video game maker EA is close to a deal to go private in a deal worth as much as
$50bn. If successful, it would be a larger leveraged buyout than when TXU went private in 2007.
Anyone remember how that one turned out? Send us your thoughts: unhedged@ft.com.

Inflation, tariffs, and growth
Core PCE inflation got just a touch cooler, on a month-over-month basis, in August. But the trend
is still basically sideways, at a level about a percentage point above the Fed’s 2 per cent target. This
is not too bad. But things may get worse in the remainder of the year. As you can see on the chart
below, there tends to be a seasonal increase in inflation towards the end of the year:

There is another issue to think about, too, pointed out by the Brookings Institution’s Robin Brooks.
The standard argument for not worrying too much about inflation running persistently above
target — heard from both Fed governors, Unhedged, and assorted others — is that tariff inflation in
imported goods is probably transitory. But inflation in things like furnishings and recreational
equipment, where tariffs inflation had been evident in the spring and early summer, cooled notably
in July and August. You don’t need to dig too deep into the subcategories of durable goods to see
the trend. It’s visible at the headline level:

This is good news. But it does imply that the rest of the inflation we are seeing is not a tariff effect.
Meanwhile, the Atlanta Fed’s GDPNow real GDP tracker is running at 3.8 per cent for the third
quarter. Some of that hot reading is likely a relic of swings in net imports, but not all of it. This
raises the possibility that, in Brooks’ words, “Our inflation is the homegrown overheating kind.” If
this thesis is confirmed in the coming months, the Fed will have hard choices to make.
(Armstrong)

Korea/Japan US FDI
Both Japan and South Korea promised significant direct investments in the US as part of trade
deals with the Trump administration: $550bn for Japan and $350bn for Korea. The US and Japan
have signed their agreement; Korea is still finalising the details. But there’s rising discontent in
Korea over the deal, as laid out in a recent FT op-ed:

Having watched how quickly handshakes at a summit in Washington can
turn into handcuffs in an immigration raid in Georgia, public sentiment in
Seoul towards the deal is showing signs of hardening . . . In this climate, a
debate has emerged over whether Seoul should resist “buying down” the
tariff and instead consider swallowing the 25 per cent [tariff] hit
What will constitute the $350bn investment is contested. Here is Marcus Noland of the Peterson
Institute for International Economics:

Originally, Korea thought it could count investment guarantees and things
like that as part of the $350bn — such as the battery factory down in
Georgia, some investment guarantees or some loans from the state bank —
and count that. But the US has now come back and said it wants equity; and
not only does it want equity, it wants equity that will be controlled by the
White House and it will not necessarily be invested in Korean firms; the US
just invests it any way they want . . . it’s a bizarre idea

The concern for Korea, however, is that it simply does not have the foreign currency reserves to
meet the White House’s equity demands. Unlike the Japanese yen, the Korean won is not a reserve
currency. Officials from Seoul have stated that Korea’s equity commitment would remain below 5
per cent of its pledge, with Japan similarly indicating that just 1 to 2 per cent of its $550 billion
pledge would be in equity. Meanwhile Trump doubled down on his equity demands last week,
referring to it as a “down payment, upfront.” Korea has $416.3bn in international reserves,
meaning that $350bn investment primarily of equity would be equivalent to signing away all of its
forex reserves to the US. This prospect is not going over well, particularly considering the bitter
memories of the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis when Korea’s foreign reserves collapsed, leading to an
IMF bailout that was viewed as a national humiliation.
There are alternatives short of abandoning the deal altogether. The Bank of Korea could receive
swap line guarantees with the Federal Reserve, or Korea can issue dollar bonds and use the
proceeds to fund its investments in the US. “But you’re going to create dollar liabilities, no matter
how you finance it. The Bank of Korea is looking at this in horror,” says Noland.
Is it possible that paying the 25 per cent tariff rate is a better deal than a $350bn investment that
could destabilise the national economy? Dean Baker at the Center for Economic and Policy
Research has argued that Korea and Japan should ‘eat the tariffs’; his calculations do include some
conjectures due to the unpredictability surrounding their impact. Noland argues regardless of
whichever is a better deal on the numbers, both countries probably won’t just accept higher duties
because of their reliance on the US security umbrella: “They cannot risk a fundamental rupture
with the US for security reasons, so they will do what they can to placate the Americans.”
As with many Trump deals, it may be possible to negotiate a softening of the headline demands.
But slow walking a deal also runs the risk of irritating Trump, and a re-escalation of tariffs. There
are no riskless options.
(Kim)
This article has been amended to clarify the size of Korea’s international reserves

One good read
Bars are good.

FT Unhedged podcast
Can’t get enough of Unhedged? Listen to our
new podcast, for a 15-minute dive into the
latest markets news and financial headlines,
twice a week. Catch up on past editions of
the newsletter here.

Recommended newsletters for you
Due Diligence — Top stories from the world of corporate finance. Sign up here
The Lex Newsletter — Lex, our investment column, breaks down the week’s key themes, with
analysis by award-winning writers. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Robert Armstrong
Unhedged
Trump tariffs
US inflation
Markets

