FT PROFESSIONAL

Federal Reserve

Federal Reserve officials warn entrenched inflation poses ‘significant risk’
Minutes from June meeting suggest even tighter monetary policy may be needed from US central bank

Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell has acknowledged the risk of a US recession in recent weeks, saying it was ‘certainly a possibility’ ©
Eric Lee/Bloomberg

Colby Smith in Washington
Published JUL 6 2022 | Updated JUL 6 2022, 15:57

Top Federal Reserve officials think entrenched inflation is a “significant risk” to the US economy
and fear tighter monetary policy will be needed if price growth exceeds their expectations,
according to an account of their most recent meeting.
The minutes of the US central bank’s June meeting, when the Fed delivered the first 0.75
percentage point rate rise since 1994, also showed that policymakers now support raising interest
rates to the point at which economic activity is restrained, with the possibility that they could
become “even more restrictive” if warranted by the data.

“Many participants judged that a significant risk now facing the committee was that elevated
inflation could become entrenched if the public began to question the resolve of the committee to
adjust the stance of policy as warranted,” the minutes said.
The notes from the Federal Open Market Committee, which were released on Wednesday, revealed
the alarm spreading through the top ranks of the US central bank over inflation, which is running
at an annual pace of 8.6 per cent. The account also showed the lengths officials were willing to go
to ensure prices do not spiral further out of control.
The Fed will decide whether to raise rates by 0.50 percentage points or 0.75 percentage points at
its meeting this month, although several officials have indicated their support for the larger
increase.
“If inflation becomes entrenched in consumer and business psyches, it will be much more difficult
to lower it over the medium term,” said Kathy Bostjancic, chief US economist at Oxford Economics.
“That is the breaking point for [the Fed], and they really want to do their best to ensure that it
doesn’t happen.”
She added: “The longer inflation remains high, the more it will become embedded in expectations.”
The minutes showed that participants were increasingly aware that their plans to tighten monetary
policy would slow the pace of economic growth. Most noted that the risks to the outlook were
“skewed to the downside” given the possibility that further tightening could weigh on activity.
The minutes echoed recent comments from Fed chair Jay Powell, who has emphasised that the
central bank has little room for manoeuvre as it tries to tame inflation without causing widespread
job losses.
A US recession is now “certainly a possibility”, and would in large part depend on factors outside of
the Fed’s control, he said last month, pointing to the war in Ukraine and prolonged Covid-19
lockdowns in China.
Powell reiterated that message last week on a panel with other central bankers, when he warned
that a failure to restore price stability would lead to an even worse outcome for the US economy.

“The process is highly likely to involve some pain, but the worst pain would be from failing to
address this high inflation and allowing it to become persistent,” he said.
The account of the June meeting shed further light on why the Fed abruptly decided to
dramatically step up the pace at which it is tightening monetary policy, opting to jettison its
previously signalled plans for a second consecutive 0.50 percentage point rate rise.
Instead, a 0.75 percentage point increase lifted the federal funds rate to a new target range of
between 1.50 per cent and 1.75 per cent.
The decision followed the publication of two economic reports, one showing a large jump in
consumer prices in May and the other a rise in inflation expectations.
Participants expressed concern that the former report suggested inflationary pressures were not
yet abating and “[solidified] the view that inflation would be more persistent than they had
previously anticipated”, according to the minutes.
The June meeting also featured revised forecasts, which indicated officials envisaged rates rising to
just under 3.5 per cent by year-end. Further rate increases that push the policy rate to 3.75 per cent
are expected next year before reductions in 2024. Officials also pencilled in higher unemployment
and lower growth over that period.
The minutes detailed why the Fed scrubbed an important line in its policy statement last month, in
which it had said it expected inflation to fall back to its 2 per cent target and the labour market to
“remain strong” as it tightens monetary policy.
“As the further firming in the policy stance would likely result in some slowing in economic growth
and tempering in labour market conditions, members also agreed to remove the previous
statement language,” the minutes said.

FT survey: How are you handling higher inflation?

We are exploring the impact of rising living costs on people around the world and want to hear
from readers about what you are doing to combat costs. Tell us via a short survey.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Central bank intervention
Global inflation
US economy
US inflation
US interest rates

