FT PROFESSIONAL

Chris Giles on Central Banks Federal Reserve

The Fed sheds one of its three big threats
The courts will not pose a problem, even if tariffs and the budget still do

The US Supreme Court says Donald Trump can fire officials at will, as long as they are not on the Fed’s board © Reuters

Chris Giles
Published MAY 27 2025

This article is an on-site version of our Chris Giles on Central Banks newsletter. Premium
subscribers can sign up here to get the newsletter delivered every Tuesday. Standard
subscribers can upgrade to Premium here, or explore all FT newsletters

At the start of the year, Fed watchers were concerned about three threats to the central bank in
2025: that Donald Trump would impose stagflationary tariffs, execute an inflationary fiscal policy
and undermine the independence of the Federal Reserve.
He did the lot.

But last Thursday, the US Supreme Court all but removed one of the threats hanging over the Fed.
In an emergency ruling, a majority on the court decided that Gwynne Wilcox — who was fired
without cause by Trump from the National Labor Relations Board in January — will stay out of her
former job while the case goes through the lower courts.
The Supreme Court also indicated that it was minded to overturn 90 years of precedent by ruling
that it was unconstitutional for Congress to create positions on similar boards in which officials are
protected from being fired, barring cases of serious misconduct.
It was all sounding pretty bad for the Fed’s governors, who have exactly these protections written
in law by Congress. Then the Supreme Court’s majority executed a handbrake turn in its reasoning.
Even though US central bankers have exactly the same protections, they are employed by “a
uniquely structured, quasi-private entity”, so different rules will apply. That is bad news for Wilcox
and other public officials fired by Trump, but good news for Jay Powell and other Fed governors.
The ruling did not make a lot of logical sense, as the protections are identical. This is what Lev
Menand at Columbia Law School told the FT, and was also the position of the three dissenting
justices. But what you, me, Menand or the minority in the court might think frankly does not
matter — because the majority on the Supreme Court decides.
Powell is safe; other US officials are not.
Powell then celebrated his new security with a ballsy rendition of the UK’s first world war
recruitment poster, “Daddy, what did YOU do in the Great War?” Praising American universities as
“a crucial national asset” at a time when the administration is attacking them, he told Princeton
graduates to fight for US democracy. “When you look back in 50 years, you will want to know that
you have done whatever it takes to preserve and strengthen our democracy, and bring us ever
closer to the founders’ timeless ideals,” Powell said.

That leaves two out of three risks
Fed officials’ jobs might be safe, but their reputations still depend on their response to the tariff
and budgetary threats hanging over the US economy. I will come back to the specifics of these as
policy becomes clearer in the coming weeks, but it is worth documenting how markets and analysts
have changed their views on likely Fed monetary policy over the past month.

At the start of May, the stagflationary risks from tariffs dominated. There were fears that very steep
tariff increases would slow the US economy to a crawl and force the Fed to ease monetary policy,
even if inflation was rising.
Despite Friday’s presidential outburst — when Trump threatened higher tariffs on imports of
iPhones and goods from the EU — the emerging view is that an expansionary budget and less
severe tariffs removed some of the recessionary threat that would have forced interest rates down.
As the chart shows, market expectations of future US interest rates are now significantly higher
along the curve by around 0.5 percentage points.

Expectations of Fed rate cuts
Midpoint of Federal Funds range and the evolution of market expectations in early April and today
Policy rate and futures curves at dates shown (%)

6

4

The market’s view is that the Fed will be slower in cutting rates, but that the projected level at the
end of 2026 will be roughly the same as it was in early April. If I instead chart the market forward
rates for the end of 2025 and the end of 2026, it is clear that in May, there was a growing
realisation that the Fed will want to wait and see before changing interest rates.

The FT’s Monetary Policy Radar has taken the view since April that a sensible central scenario
would see no US rate cuts at all in 2025, with an alternative scenario containing a significant
loosening of policy. We judge the risks of each to be pretty similar.

During May, financial markets lost confidence in multiple interest rate cuts in
2025
Future Fed Funds rate at dates shown (%)

4.5
Current US Fed Funds rate

4

What is going on with UK inflation?
Last week, UK inflation figures for April brought difficult headlines for the Bank of England.
Annual headline inflation was up from 2.6 per cent in March to 3.5 per cent in April, with far from
all the action being in energy prices. Core inflation rose from 3.4 per cent to 3.8 per cent.
Everyone knew inflation would rise, because there were significant increases in gas and electricity
tariffs already announced in February. There were also specific tax increases, such as vehicle excise
duties, and the likelihood of higher airfares because Easter was later in 2025. But the actual figures
exceeded the 3.3 per cent increase expected by analysts and the 3.4 per cent expected by the BoE
itself.

With the benefit of hindsight, it appears that the bigger problem lay in the forecasts rather than in
a nasty surprise in the data. More than the rise in overall inflation can be accounted for by gas and
electricity prices, vehicle excise duties and a 27 per cent rise in air fares. These are all one-offs, and
airfares are likely to fall back in May.
The BoE has a supercore services inflation which excludes indexed and volatile components, rents
and foreign holidays. I calculate it fell from 4.4 per cent in March to 4.2 per cent in April. This is a
good measure to use when you know there are volatile components in the data (which forced even
the FT core measure of inflation higher). So, April was not quite as awful as it first seemed.
That said, there is no doubt that UK disinflation has slowed, as the chart below shows, when
looking at two measures that really try to get at the persistent nature of price movements. There is
a balanced debate on the Monetary Policy Committee between those who worry the slowdown in
disinflation highlights a deeper problem and those who think it is merely a pause.

The big picture is that UK underlying disinflation has slowed
Underlying annual inflation rate (%)
BoE supercore services

FT core

8

6

4

The April data also illustrated the need for a common and official measure of inflation adjusted for
seasonal effects such as a late Easter. Everyone — including us at the FT — is producing their own
seasonally adjusted series, so inevitably there is no shared truth to guide the debate.
The good news is that the Office for National Statistics recognises this is problematic, will consult
on the matter over the summer and hopes to be ready to publish next March. At the excellent UK
Economic Statistics Centre of Excellence conference last week (disclaimer: I am on its advisory
board), Huw Dixon and Monica George Michail presented their analysis of the feasibility of
seasonally adjusting UK inflation data.

Read their excellent paper if you want the details. But the summary is that seasonal adjustment is
clearly possible, although as the chart below shows, seasonal patterns in pricing do change over
time. That means the seasonally adjusted data will get revised — and the most problematic
monthly inflation numbers, unfortunately, are almost always the most recent.

The changing pattern of seasonal prices in the UK
Monthly price relative to the average price for the year (%)
1

Less seasonality
Less
seasonality since
since 1994
1994

0.5

0

-0.5

-1

Lowest
prices in
September

Lowest
prices in
December

Lowest Lowest
prices in prices in
February January

1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
Source: H Dixon & MG Micha

What I’ve been reading and watching
The US dollar is again on the skids.
Wags in the US administration dubbed Trump’s “big, beautiful” bill “triple
B”, says Gillian Tett, putting it just above junk status.

John Thornhill puts his finger on the bullshit that underpins large language
models.
Stablecoins are bank deposits, Robert Armstrong argues over at Unhedged,
which obviously makes their issuers banks.

A chart that matters
If you are prone to worrying about persistence in inflation, the chart below provides just the shock
you crave. Joseph Gagnon at the Peterson Institute and Steven Kamin of the American Enterprise
Institute have discovered a cross-country relationship between historic inflation and recent price
rises.
Countries that suffered high inflation in the 2000s had higher pandemic-era inflation. This is not
just a “proximity to Russia” relationship, and I have improved on the authors’ estimates by
including the latest data below.
It appears that central banks’ promises to keep inflation under control are less credible in countries
that have experienced high inflation, even in the distant past. To the extent this relationship is
causal and holds, future policymakers are in for a pretty rough ride.

Countries that had previous experience of high inflation performed worse
between 2020 and 2024
10

Average inflation 2020-2024

Estonia
Estonia

8

Czech Republic
Czech
Republic
Slovakia
Slovakia
Croatia
Croatia

6

Austria Netherlands
Austria
Netherlands

Sweden
Sweden
Australia
Australia
Ireland
Ireland
Canada
Canada
Malta
Malta
Finland
Finland
Korea
Korea
Israel
Israel

4

2

0

Latvia
Latvia

Japan
Japan

Iceland
Iceland

Slovenia
Slovenia

Taiwan
Taiwan

Hong Kong
Hong
Kong Switzerland
Switzerland

0

2

4

6

Average inflation 2000-2009
Sources: Gagnon & Kamin (2025), FT calculation

Central Banks is edited by Harvey Nriapia

Recommended newsletters for you
Free Lunch — Your guide to the global economic policy debate. Sign up here
The Lex Newsletter — Lex, our investment column, breaks down the week’s key themes, with
analysis by award-winning writers. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global inflation
US economy
Federal Reserve
Chris Giles on Central Banks
Chris Giles

