FT PROFESSIONAL

FirstFT World

FirstFT: Fed raises rates to highest level in 22 years
Also in today’s newsletter, Russia unleashes missile barrage on Ukraine and Meta’s double-digit revenue
growth

US Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell has left the door open to additional rate increases © Bloomberg

David Hindley
Published JUL 26 2023 | Updated JUL 27 2023, 06:36

The US Federal Reserve has raised its benchmark interest rate by a quarter of a percentage point to
a new range of 5.25 to 5.5, leaving open the possibility of more increases later in the year.
Much of the markets had factored in a rate increase this month, but while stocks and bonds dipped
slightly in yesterday’s trading they were largely unaffected.

At a press conference after announcing the increase, Fed chair Jay Powell would not say if more
interest rate increases were planned, stating “I would say it is certainly possible that we would raise
funds again at the September meeting if the data warranted”. He added: “It’s possible that we
would choose to hold steady at that meeting. We’re going to be making careful assessments . . .
meeting by meeting.”
Some analysts had more positive outlooks. “We think that the Fed is done raising rates,” said Bob
Michele, chief investment officer at JPMorgan Asset Management. “We see enough signs of
inflation moderating. By the time they meet in September, that is likely to be evident in both
inflation and the growth.”

Around the world: The European central bank is also expected to raise
rates by a quarter of a percentage point today to 3.75 per cent. Just as new
data suggests high rates have pushed business loans in the region to the
lowest level on record.
There’s a lot happening today, here is some of the big stuff:

GDP: The US economy is forecast to have expanded at an annualised rate
of 1.8 per cent in the second quarter, according to a Refinitiv poll, a slight
slowing from the 2 per cent pace in the first three months of the year.
McDonald’s: Investors will be focusing on commentary about consumer
demand in an environment of lingering, elevated inflation when the fastfood chain reports this morning. Analysts expect McDonald’s to report a
nearly 10 per cent increase in revenue to $6.3bn and earnings of $2.80 a
share.

Ford: The automaker should update investors on how its new vision is
progressing, as it seeks to cut costs in the near term and position itself for a
mostly electrified future. Ford recently deepened a price war with Tesla
against a backdrop of overall electric vehicle sales gaining momentum in
the US.
More earnings: Aerospace and defence contractor Northrop Grumman,
payments processor Mastercard, pharmaceutical company Bristol-Myers
Squib, confectioner Hershey, cruise line Royal Caribbean, industrials group
Honeywell, carrier Southwest Airlines and motorcycle manufacturer
Harley-Davidson report before the opening bell. Packaged food producer
Mondelez will report after the market closes. See our Week Ahead
newsletter for the full list.
More data: The durable goods report from the Census Bureau will contain
details expected to show that underlying investment spending by
businesses edged lower in June. Separately, jobless claims were forecast to
have risen slightly to 235,000 in the week ended July 22.

Five more top stories
1. Russia unleashed a missile barrage across Ukraine yesterday as it switched the focus
of its attacks from Black Sea ports to inland targets, including an air base. Ukraine’s president
Volodymyr Zelenskyy said in an evening address to the nation that “the absolute majority” of
missiles fired “were shot down”.

Related: Nato will step up air force patrol flights and drone deployments
around the Black Sea to counter Russian threats to ports and ships.

2. Hunter Biden’s plea deal with federal prosecutors has unravelled after a judge said
she was not prepared to sign off on it. The president’s son will now plead not guilty to a firearm
charge that under the agreement he was set to avoid. Read more about the Biden legal position
here.
3. Niger soldiers claimed to have removed President Mohamed Bazoum from power
in a television announcement last night, several hours after the presidential guard barricaded the
African leader in his residence. If successful, the military coup would be the latest in a region that
has turned against the west. Here’s why the removal of Bazoum, a key western ally, could spell
further trouble.
4. Meta shares rose after it reported its first double-digit revenue growth since 2021,
as Mark Zuckerberg said the company’s costly bet on artificial intelligence was already showing
signs of paying off. The chief executive has sought to revive the tech giant after a period of sluggish
growth and investor concern over his wager on the metaverse. Here’s what Meta is focusing on
next.

AI: Anthropic, Google, Microsoft and OpenAI have formed a group to
research increasingly powerful artificial intelligence and establish best
practices for controlling it.
Twitter: Days after Elon Musk announced the platform’s rebranding to X,
chief executive Linda Yaccarino visited Hollywood in a bid to woo talent
agencies and entertainers.
5. Computer maker HP plans to move large portions of production from China to
Thailand and Mexico primarily to avoid US/China trade tensions. HP’s announcement follows
similar moves by Dell, which plans to exclude chips made in China from its products. Read more
about HP’s plans here.

The Big Read

© FT montage/Bloomberg

Luvsannamsrain Oyun-Erdene, Mongolia’s Harvard-educated, reformist prime minister, wants
western mining groups to tap his country’s vast deposits of copper, uranium and other critical
minerals essential to the world’s fight against climate change. The government is making sweeping
reforms to win over western investors and become less reliant on China and Russia.

We’re also reading . . .
Joe Lewis: Who is the British billionaire and Tottenham Hotspur owner
recently charged by US prosecutors over alleged insider trading?
War in Ukraine: Kyiv’s allies expect Russia to attack from multiple
directions and employ more air power in its long-planned spring offensive.

Centrism’s problems: The ideology is defined really only by what it is
against and often claims a political middle that doesn’t exist, writes Jemima
Kelly.

Graphic of the day
A new peer-reviewed study suggests with 95 per cent certainty that the north Atlantic’s warm water
“conveyor belt”, known as the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation, could collapse between
2025 and 2095. The result would be drier summers and storm-filled winters.

Take a break from the news
Summer “workcations” are on the rise. Many companies view workcations — essentially doing a job
from a holiday location — as a free post-pandemic perk they can give staff in a tight labour market,
and that “work from anywhere” weeks can boost productivity.

© FT montage/Getty/Dreamstime

Additional contributions by Tee Zhuo, Leah Quinn and Benjamin Wilhelm

Recommended newsletters for you
Asset Management — Find out the inside story of the movers and shakers behind a
multitrillion-dollar industry. Sign up here
The Week Ahead — Start every week with a preview of what’s on the agenda. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
World
Companies
FirstFT
David Hindley

