FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion US interest rates

A US recession is not off the table yet
A bigger rate cut than the Fed envisages may be warranted in September

TEJ PARIKH

Seemingly ‘strong’ numbers, such as consumption figures, belie a weaker underlying economy © Bloomberg

Tej Parikh
Published AUG 2 2024

Jay Powell is keeping calm about the US economic outlook — perhaps overly so. The Federal
Reserve opted to hold interest rates at its midweek meeting, though it adjusted its tone, citing
moderating job gains and rising unemployment as signs of a cooling economy. That opens the door
to cuts in September.
The problem is that weakening activity tends to feed off itself, meaning a cooling economy can
quickly turn into a recessionary one. Has the Fed left it too late?

Since May, US economic data has indeed started to surprise to the downside, according to Citi’s
Economic Surprise Index. But, signs of America’s slowdown had been emerging well before the
Fed’s recent change in emphasis. Full-time household employment started weakening towards the
end of 2023, credit card delinquencies rose above pre-pandemic levels around then, too.

That the US avoided a forecasted recession in 2023 has helped keep faith in an economic softlanding this year — and has perhaps contributed to favourable interpretations of data. Take the
above-expectation economic growth figures for the second quarter. The 2.8 per cent annualised
rate was taken as evidence that the US economy is in fine fettle. But dig deeper, and you see the
flaws.
Government spending — backed by a hefty deficit — has helped prop up growth. Jobs have been
bolstered by a public sector hiring spree, too. What about consumer expenditure? Break it down
and the largest spending contributions come from essentials such as rents, utilities, health and
food rather than discretionary stuff. Consumption growth is outpacing income as well. Indeed,
seemingly “strong” numbers belie a weaker underlying economy.

Leading economic indicators look troubling, too. The ISM manufacturing New Orders Index is in
contraction territory, and has been a decent signal for a recession in the past. Jobless claims rose to
an 11-month high last week, small businesses have been cutting hiring plans, and many consumerfacing companies have recently recorded earnings misses.

Slowing economic activity could prompt a wider correction
S&P 500 index

ISM New Order

6,000

120

4,000

80

2,000

40

0
2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2024

0

Sources: Haver Analytics, ISM manufacturing • US recessions shade

The proximate cause is the Fed’s interest rate policy. The Committee debated cutting rates at its
July meeting, and could end up lamenting not doing so. Annual US inflation — measured by the
Fed’s preferred benchmark of the personal consumption expenditures index — came within 0.5
percentage points in June of the central bank’s 2 per cent target. Price pressures are also on a
downward trend: the jobs market is cooling, and wage growth is easing.

A precautionary cut midweek would not have equated to a substantial easing either. Many
households and businesses will still face steep borrowing costs if they have to refinance fixed-rate
loans coming up for renewal. The question is whether they should face current peak rates, or
something slightly lower, in line with easing demand. For measure, Goldman Sachs recently
estimated the median optimal interest rate, based on various monetary policy rules, to be closer to
4 per cent. All this points to the Fed pressing too hard on the brakes, for too long.

Market signals are looking ominous, too. Based on the slope of the curve of bond yields over time,
which has been an unreliable indicator recently, the New York Fed estimates an above 50 per cent
chance of a recession in the coming year. Stock valuations appear stretched, too. Indeed, the
concentration of the S&P 500 index — with the magnificent seven tech stocks making up more than
30 per cent of its value — makes it vulnerable to a correction in the bullish AI narrative.

Some argue that rate cuts would only encourage an asset bubble. The prospect of rate cuts may in
part support equities, but the S&P 500’s relentless upward march has recently wobbled as
investors begin to question whether AI can deliver the revenues needed to cover the hefty capital
investment currently being committed. That has happened even though rates cuts are coming into
view.

The problem is that by September the Fed may realise that demand has been overly restrained. It
may then need to front-load more cuts — punting for a 0.50 percentage point reduction, instead of
a 0.25 point cut. That would worry equity markets.
This may seem unlikely now, but the economy does not slow in a linear manner. The loss of
economic momentum, which has been happening for longer, and is deeper, than many seem to
appreciate can become a self-reinforcing spiral. Joblessness, delinquencies and bankruptcies can
suddenly spike, and a market priced for a soft-landing could quickly unwind. The recessionary
warnings are flashing, they should not be taken lightly.
tej.parikh@ft.com

Follow Tej Parikh with myFT and on X

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Tej Parikh
Global Economy
US interest rates
US employment
Federal Reserve

