FT PROFESSIONAL

Disrupted Times Global Economy

US well placed for interest rate cuts, says OECD
Also in this newsletter: Lloyds and Santander in spotlight over Iran, music industry blues, AI-aided
brainstorming

The OECD forecast that US inflation would fall to 2.2% in 2024 and 2% in 2025 © AFP via Getty Images

Darren Dodd
Published FEB 5 2024

This article is an on-site version of our Disrupted Times newsletter. Sign up here to get the
newsletter sent straight to your inbox three times a week

Today’s top stories
Volodymyr Zelenskyy is considering a sweeping “reset” of Ukraine’s
military and civilian leadership in an attempt to reinvigorate its war effort
almost two years since the start of Russia’s full-scale invasion.
The FT revealed that Iran had used Lloyds and Santander, two of the UK’s
biggest banks, to covertly move money around the world as part of a vast
sanctions-evasion scheme backed by Tehran’s intelligence services.
Amazon struck a deal with Reach, the UK’s largest publisher, over
obtaining customer data to target online advertising. The deal is a response
to Google’s move to axe “cookies” that help gather information about users
by tracking their activity across websites.
For up-to-the-minute news updates, visit our live blog

Good evening.
The US was well placed to start cutting interest rates because of the rapid fall in inflation, the
OECD said today, in stark contrast to the UK, which the organisation maintained would experience
the G7’s fastest price growth this year and next.
The Paris-based club of rich nations, in its interim Economic Outlook, forecast US inflation of 2.2
per cent in 2024 and 2 per cent in 2025. The only G7 member with lower price pressures this year
was Italy, the OECD said.
The OECD said inflation would fall to most G20 countries’ target rates by the end of 2025 but
warned that policies “should remain restrictive for some time to come”, warning against any
slashing of rates back to the near-zero levels of before the pandemic.

The path to lower interest rates may not be without some bumps on the way. Government bonds
were sold off today in response to US Federal Reserve chief Jay Powell’s comments at the weekend
that he expected about three quarter-point cuts this year, dashing hopes from traders for more
rapid and steep cuts. The sell-off in US Treasuries deepened later in the day after fresh data
showed that the country’s services sector grew more than expected in January.
Powell was followed today by the head of the Minneapolis Fed, who said policymakers should not
rush to cut rates.

As our Big Read explains, central banks are reluctant to declare victory over inflation while labour
markets are still running hot, as evidenced by Friday’s “stunning” US jobs data for January.

The task has been made even harder for policymakers in the UK, where it was revealed today that
there would be a six-month delay to the introduction of more reliable labour market data. They
will, however, be cheered by PMI data suggesting that activity in the UK’s dominant services sector,
as in the US, rose faster than previously expected last month. The OECD projects UK inflation will
hit 2.8 per cent this year and 2.4 per cent in 2025.
On growth, the US is also expected to be the top G7 performer this year with 2.1 per cent. Germany
is expected to be the weakest with just 0.3 per cent, while the OECD forecasts the UK will expand
by 0.7 per cent in 2024 and 1.2 per cent in 2025.

Need to know: UK and Europe economy
Northern Ireland finally has a new power-sharing executive, but the pressure is now on to solve
problems made worse by two years of political paralysis over Brexit, including finding cash for
public sector pay rises. The executive has already said £3.3bn in funding from Westminster is not
enough.
Chief economics commentator Martin Wolf says the UK is caught in a vicious downward political
spiral when it needs bold leadership and imaginative policy. Tax cuts should be off the agenda, he
writes, when the country is desperate for higher public and private investment.

The UK shelved long-awaited rules on the training of artificial intelligence models using
copyrighted material after industry executives were unable to agree on a voluntary code of practice.

German opposition to the proposed overhaul of an EU military support fund risks delaying arms
deliveries to Ukraine, officials have warned. The €12bn European Peace Facility, set up outside
the shared EU budget, has been depleted after reimbursing member states for arms they have
shipped to Kyiv. A showdown over Ukraine aid is also brewing in the US Congress.

Need to know: global economy
El Salvador’s President Nayib Bukele declared victory in presidential and congressional elections
on the back of soaring approval ratings for his draconian crackdown on gangs.
More than 3mn people face acute hunger in Ethiopia with echoes of the 1984 famine when half a
million people starved to death. UK development minister Andrew Mitchell said the crisis had been
provoked by drought as well as a two-year civil war between Tigray and the federal government in
Addis Ababa.
Senegal is in a constitutional crisis after President Macky Sall delayed elections for six months.
A mining start-up backed by Bill Gates and Jeff Bezos said it had discovered a vast copper deposit
in Zambia in a boost to western efforts to cut reliance on China for metals vital for
decarbonisation. The Mingomba site in the northern Copperbelt province will become one of the
world’s top three high-grade copper mines

Need to know: business
Yandex, often referred to as “Russia’s Google”, agreed to sell its operations in the country for
$5bn as it seeks to secure its future in the aftermath of the war in Ukraine. The sale by its
Netherlands-based parent follows a long negotiation with the Kremlin over how to redomicile a
strategically important Russian asset while extracting some value for its western shareholders.
Big Tech groups Microsoft, Google, Meta and Amazon added almost $10bn to their profits in the
past two years by extending the estimated working life of their servers, an accounting change that
will help ease the burden of future costs such as developing generative AI.
Microsoft is working with media start-up Semafor to create news stories using an AI chatbot in a
service called Signals. The deal comes as media companies become increasingly concerned over
generative AI and its threat to their businesses.

Helle Thorning-Schmidt, co-chair of Meta and former Danish premier, writing in the FT, urged
social media companies to tailor their policies to basic principles of transparency and freedom of
expression.
A unit of Jardine Matheson, one of Hong Kong’s oldest colonial-era business empires, is
resuming gold exploration in Indonesia despite concerns that it could threaten the habitat of the
world’s most endangered great ape.
The music industry has got the blues, thanks to the growth of streaming, job cuts, AI anxiety and
the fact that one person now sells more music than the entire categories of jazz or classical.
Whether Taylor Swift could also swing the US presidential election, however, is another matter.

The world of work
A company-wide brainstorm, a high-level “ideation session” or even a — lord help us — “strategy
jam”. Andrew Hill wonders whether AI could make problem-solving processes less mind-numbing.

While the younger generation is the most likely to demand homeworking, they are also the most
disadvantaged by it, says FT columnist Camilla Cavendish. A new study bears out the old-fashioned
idea that sitting with colleagues in a building can improve skills and job satisfaction, she writes.

Some good news
Recyclable 3D-printed homes are now a reality. A project in the US state of Maine is creating
bio-based houses for the homeless crafted from materials such as wood fibres and bio-resins.

© University of Maine, Advanced Structures and Composites Center

Recommended newsletters
Working it — Discover the big ideas shaping today’s workplaces with a weekly newsletter from
Work & Careers editor Isabel Berwick. Sign up here
The Climate Graphic: Explained — Understanding the most important climate data of the week.
Sign up here

Thanks for reading Disrupted Times. If this newsletter has been forwarded to you, please sign
up here to receive future issues. And please share your feedback with us at
disruptedtimes@ft.com. Thank you

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
Global inflation
Disrupted Times
Darren Dodd

