FT PROFESSIONAL

US inflation

US inflation rises to 2.6%
October figure comes as Federal Reserve debates how quickly to lower interest rates

© FT

Colby Smith and Harriet Clarfelt in New York
Published NOV 13 2024 | Updated NOV 13 2024, 16:49

US inflation rose to 2.6 per cent in October, as the Federal Reserve debates whether to cut interest
rates at its last meeting before US president-elect Donald Trump takes office.
Wednesday’s figure from the Bureau of Labor Statistics was in line with economists’ expectations
of a 2.6 per cent rate of growth and above September’s 2.4 per cent.
Once volatile food and energy prices were stripped out, “core” CPI held steady at 3.3 per cent on an
annual basis. However, monthly core prices rose 0.3 per cent for a third month in a row, indicating
underlying inflation had yet to be fully tamed.

Alberto Musalem, president of the St Louis Fed, warned in a speech on Wednesday that the risk
inflation stalled out above 2 per cent or moved higher had risen, while the risk that the labour
market deteriorates quickly had “possibly fallen”.
He reiterated his call for “gradual” reductions in interest rates.
Sarah House, senior economist at Wells Fargo, said Wednesday’s figures showed “it’s difficult to
wring out this last bit of inflation”, pointing to the “long tail” of the impact of the Covid-19
pandemic and the persistence of price pressures in services.
The inflation data will be closely watched by the US central bank, which has lowered its benchmark
rate by 0.75 percentage points over two successive meetings to a new target range of 4.5 per cent to
4.75 per cent.
Fed officials are trying to reach a “neutral” rate setting that keeps inflation in check without
squashing demand, in an attempt to pull off a so-called soft landing that would avoid a recession.
In the wake of Trump’s election, markets have been worried about a resurgence of inflation, driving
up Treasury yields. They fell back slightly following Wednesday’s data release, as investors bet the
Fed was now more likely to cut interest rates next month.
Futures markets imply a roughly 80 per cent probability of a quarter-point cut in December, up
from 60 per cent before the inflation figures.

US inflation ticked up in October
% change in consumer price index for all urban consumers
Year over year
Enter category to show
10%

8%

6%

All items
All
items
less food
less
food
and energy
and
energy
All items
All
items

4%

2%

0%
Jan '20

Jan '22

Jan '24

Source: US Bureau of Labor Statistics • Monthly changes are seasonally adjusted, yearly changes
are unadjusted
FT graphic: Oliver Roeder

Two-year Treasury yields, which track interest rate expectations, were down 0.06 percentage
points to 4.28 per cent.
House said “I think we’re seeing some relief that [the inflation data] wasn’t an upside surprise and
relief that it was just in line with expectations.”
US stocks stalled, with the S&P 500 closing less than 0.1 per cent higher, and the Nasdaq
Composite shedding 0.3 per cent.

Most metrics suggest the US economy is in good health, with recent retail sales figures suggesting
consumers are still spending. The labour market is also robust despite last month’s poor jobs
report, which was dragged down by hurricanes and a strike at Boeing.
Inflation has fallen significantly from its peak of more than 9 per cent in 2022, but progress has
slowed in recent months.
On a monthly basis, prices rose 0.3 per cent — in line with the past three reports. Half of that
increase stemmed from a 0.4 per cent increase in the index tracking housing-related costs, the BLS
said on Wednesday.
Energy prices were flat for the month, following a 1.9 per cent decline in September. Further
increases in airline fares were offset by declines in prices for clothes and furniture.
At a press conference last week, following the Fed’s latest quarter-point rate cut, chair Jay Powell
said he expected inflation to “come down on a bumpy path over the next couple of years” before
settling near the central bank’s 2 per cent target.
Neel Kashkari, Minneapolis Fed president, on Wednesday told Bloomberg he was confident
“inflation is headed [in] the right direction”.
But the path could become more volatile following Trump’s victory. The president-elect has
pledged to enact sweeping tariffs, deport immigrants en masse and lower taxes. Economists warn
these policies could stoke price pressures while breeding uncertainty that could hamper growth.
Mark McCormick, head of forex and emerging markets strategy at TD Securities, said a second
Trump presidency, combined with relatively strong recent economic data, made one “cautious to
think that inflation can get back to 2 per cent at a comfortable rate any time soon”.
Powell last week said the Fed did not “speculate” about the timing or substance of any future policy
changes. As such, he said, “in the near term, the election will have no effects on our policy
decisions”.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US economy
US politics & policy
US inflation
US interest rates
Federal Reserve

