FT PROFESSIONAL

US interest rates

Jay Powell warns Fed is prepared to return to bigger interest rate rises
High-stakes testimony before Senate committee comes as central bank struggles to cool US economy

Fed chair Jay Powell’s testimony marks the first public remarks since data releases showed the central bank is still struggling to cool
the US economy © Andrew Harnik/AP

Colby Smith and James Politi in Washington
Published MAR 7 2023 | Updated MAR 7 2023, 16:01

Jay Powell warned the US Federal Reserve is prepared to return to bigger interest rate rises to fight
inflation at a congressional appearance on Tuesday.
In his first public intervention since data releases showed the central bank struggling to cool the
US economy despite a year-long campaign of monetary tightening, the Fed chair signalled his
willingness to ratchet up rate increases to combat persistent price rises.
Powell told the Senate banking committee that “the ultimate level of interest rates is likely to be
higher than previously anticipated” and said recent economic data was “stronger than expected”.

He added: “If the totality of the data were to indicate that faster tightening is warranted, we would
be prepared to increase the pace of rate hikes.”
The Fed chair’s remarks prompted a stock market sell-off, with the S&P 500 closing 1.5 per cent
lower in New York while the Nasdaq fell 1.25 per cent. The two-year Treasury yield, which moves
with market expectations, rose to its highest level since 2007, at 5 per cent.
Traders increased their bets on a half-point rate rise at the Fed’s March 21-22 meeting, with the
odds now favouring such a rise rather than a quarter-point increase, according to the CME Group.
The central bank has reduced the size of its rate rises from 0.75 percentage points between June
and November to a half-point rise in December. It shifted down again in February to a more
traditional quarter-point increase.
The Fed’s main interest rate is now at a target range between 4.5 per cent and 4.75 per cent,
compared with near zero at this time last year. In December, Fed officials projected interest rates
would reach a peak of 5.1 per cent this year.
But Powell’s comments signal he is willing to squeeze the economy further to push inflation down.
His hawkish rhetoric is in line with statements from Christine Lagarde, president of the European
Central Bank, who warned at the weekend that price pressures were “sticky”, requiring further
action to tackle the inflation “monster”. Financial markets now expect the European rate to rise
from 2.5 per cent to above 4 per cent.
By contrast, Andrew Bailey, Bank of England governor, has been cautious not to give a precise steer
on UK interest rates.
Two critical data releases due before the Fed’s meeting this month will help to inform its next
decision on rates: the monthly jobs report on Friday and the consumer price index report for
February, published next week.

Investors and economists will be watching to see whether the rebound in the labour market and
consumer demand in January was sustained last month. Powell said the hot data “likely reflects the
unseasonably warm weather” but also indicates “inflationary pressures are running higher than
expected”.
Democrats have been growing increasingly anxious that the Fed will go too far in tightening
monetary policy, triggering a recession that could undermine many of the labour market gains
achieved during the recovery from the coronavirus pandemic. But Powell maintained that getting
core inflation to the Fed’s 2 per cent target from January’s level of 4.7 per cent would “very likely”
require “some softening in labour market conditions”, suggesting job losses ahead.
“We cannot risk undermining one of the successes of our current economy,” Sherrod Brown, chair
of the Senate banking committee, said.
Elizabeth Warren, the progressive Democrat from Massachusetts, accused Powell of “gambling
with people’s lives”.
Asked by Warren whether Americans at risk of losing their jobs are just supposed to “bear it”,
Powell replied: “Will working people be better off if we just walk away from our jobs, and inflation
remains above 6 per cent?”
He added the “social cost of failure” on inflation was “very, very high” and warned of the risk of the
“psychology” of “self-perpetuating” inflation.
In a separate exchange with John Kennedy, the Republican senator from Louisiana, Powell
rejected the idea that bringing inflation back down would push the unemployment rate above 10
per cent.
Instead, he said the Fed saw a “path” to getting inflation under control “with less significant effects
on the labour market”.
Powell also faced questions on banking regulation, with Democrats pressing the Fed to tighten
capital standards for the largest institutions, and Republicans pleading for looser treatment.
Michael Barr, the Fed’s vice-chair for supervision, is leading a review of capital rules.

Additional reporting by Tommy Stubbington and Chris Giles
This article has been amended to reflect the fact that John Kennedy is a senator from Louisiana,
not Tennessee

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US inflation
US interest rates
Central banks
Federal Reserve
US

