FT PROFESSIONAL

Economists Exchange

Global Economy

Christopher Pissarides: ‘Debt and
inflation could see us lose control’
The Nobel laureate argues that policymakers
cannot tackle social problems by running the
economy hot

© Leonie Woods

Delphine Strauss
Published JUN 14 2022

This is part of a series, ‘Economists Exchange’, featuring conversations between top FT
commentators and leading economists
In the UK, unemployment is at its lowest for almost half a century, but large numbers of people
have chosen to drop out of the workforce. In the eurozone, the jobless rate is the lowest since the
creation of the single currency. In the US, acute labour shortages have created a jobseekers’ market
— although wages are still lagging behind inflation.

The problems in labour markets look very different from when Christopher Pissarides, regius
professor of economics at the LSE and a former adviser to the Cypriot and Greek governments,
began his academic career in the 1970s — a time when governments were struggling to get to grips
with a new era of mass unemployment.
But for Pissarides — who won a Nobel Prize in 2010 for his work on friction in labour markets —
many of the answers are similar.
Then, he argued that unemployment could not be solved by macroeconomic stimulus, because it
was partly due to mismatches between the jobs and the skills of the workers available. Now, he
contends that policymakers need to rid themselves of the urge to tackle social problems through
monetary and fiscal stimulus that will fuel inflation but not bring any fundamental shift in workers’
bargaining power.
Discussing the new review he is leading, of automation and the future of work in the UK, he argues
that the remedies for regional inequality will instead lie in upskilling people for new roles, and
using the flexibilities afforded by remote working to help older workers remain in the workforce or
re-enter it.
Delphine Strauss: Chris, what differences do you see between this recovery and the last one,
after 2008? It seems as if in the aftermath of the financial crisis we had a different problem, with
very persistent unemployment in the eurozone, and then a big rise in low quality work and
insecurity in the US and the UK. How do you think the Covid crisis has changed the nature of the
challenge?
Christopher Pissarides: It’s a completely different kind of recovery we’re facing now. Not only
because of Covid, but also because it has coincided with the war in Ukraine and what’s happening
to prices of materials. In 2008, the recession was focused on the financial sector, and the main
spillover from there was in construction or housing . . . Once you brought [those two sectors] under
control . . . then recovery was going to come on its own, as it did.

I do think there were mistakes made, like the debt-reduction policies of George Osborne [then UK
chancellor]. Of course, I believe it was a big mistake. It’s the first thing where I appeared in the
press with headlines — saying Britain’s new Nobel laureate says it’s a mistake, the sovereign risk is
not going to be so high as to warrant this kind of policy. That’s what slowed down the recovery,
rather than the economy itself. Very importantly, there was no inflation at the time. So, we could
use these expansionary monetary policies as we wanted, to get us out of the recession and there
were no inflationary risks.
Now, we’re running into the problem that there is a lot more debt. So, some debt reduction might
be justified before it gets out of control — although, until recently, I thought that it wasn’t justified
yet. Coinciding with the rise in energy prices and those spreading out into the economy, and with
the huge expansion of furlough schemes and other things during the pandemic internationally, that
created a situation where we might be running risks that would get out of control. The debt
situation — debt and inflation combined — could see us lose control in macro management and not
be able to bring the economy under control quickly enough.
On top of that, technological changes are taking place. They were happening independently in the
economy because of automation, robotics and so on, but Covid brought new technological changes.
Couple that with China being the main trading partner of the UK, outside Europe, and going into
lockdown seemingly forever, and what’s happening with energy supplies and in other supply
chains. There are so many things taking place simultaneously that it’s really a very, very difficult
job, knowing how to co-ordinate policy and how to control the economy so as to bring a recovery
that is quick enough and without big costs, especially for those on lower incomes and for the
inequality we’ve been observing across Britain.
DS: Do you think it’s still possible for policymakers to seek to tackle social problems by running
the economy hot? Or is the idea of running a high-pressure economy not realistic any more?

The debt situation could see us
lose control in macro
management

CP: The problem with running the economy hot to
deal with such problems is that it might bring even more inflation. That will affect the very people
you are trying to help. The only solution I see is something similar to the furlough policy, but
addressed to people in work on low incomes — because you have this double whammy of
[inflation] and new technologies, which are hitting mainly low incomes and unskilled jobs. That’s
the section of the economy that needs a little help, but it doesn’t need fiscal policy — general macro
fiscal policy type of help — because inflation is a real constraint.
DS: Is automation still the biggest threat for low-income workers or are we coming into a situation
where labour shortages mean it’s a benign phenomenon?
CP: I think we’re reaching a point where companies will automate because of the shortages of
labour. I know agriculture is a small sector, but a lot of the seasonal agricultural labour in the UK
was immigrant labour, which is a lot more difficult now . . . No one would blame a company that
relies on that type of work for automating.
I don’t think it’s a risk if other measures are put in place at the same time — upskilling and the
transition to new types of jobs where there are labour shortages. The skills required in the new jobs
are different from the ones that automation technologies have taken over. They may be a bit more
technical. They will rely more on social interaction, as in the hospitality industry and in health and
care . . . But they require training. There are also jobs where there are a lot of traditionally gendered
differences that it might take time to get rid of.
Those things are problems that need to be tackled, but if they are tackled correctly, automation will
be a welcome aspect of how we run the labour market. Productivity will go up and there is no
reason why we should have the inequalities that we have, because the new jobs will be more highly
skilled.
You might ask, how can we provide that kind of help? I think that’s where government comes in. If
it’s going to find money to support the labour market, that’s where it should be directed — to
upskilling, providing information about the transition into new types of jobs and giving subsidies
to companies that train.

DS: In the US and UK, we have very low unemployment alongside very high vacancies and lower
participation. What should governments be doing to boost employment?
CP: Through training programmes and the other

Automation will be a welcome
aspect of how we run the labour
market

issues about how you identify with new types of
jobs . . . a publicity campaign that these jobs pay well
and so on. Then there will be more participation.
Especially from women and older workers, because
although participation of over-65s is increasing, it’s

still way down if you compare it with healthy life expectancies. That would rise if there were more
flexible types of arrangements at work. Then, that could be combined with more automation at the
lower, unskilled end of the market.
DS: If labour shortages are going to be endemic for a while, do you think we will get a real shift in
workers’ bargaining power and ability to get the terms they want?
CP: Well, on the one hand, you might think we will because there is unusually high demand for
labour, given the conditions. But on the other hand, workers do feel a lot more threatened by new
technologies and all these unanticipated shocks — Covid, war in Europe. So, I don’t see them, or
their unions, being aggressive in pushing for wage rises without worrying about jobs. That
mentality, I think, is past.
I do see market forces pushing in that direction, because employers who think they have good
business and cannot find workers might be raising wages. But again, that would depend very much
on whether the training programmes are in place and whether the transitions workers would be
making are feasible.
DS: Do you see any reason to think that the longer-term trend of slower productivity growth will
change, post-Covid — and what would that mean for monetary policy?

CP: It’s certainly not in the statistics as yet, but you would think that if we played the automation
possibilities and new technologies well, there would be some [pick-up], at least in manufacturing
and sectors such as finance. But somehow, you don’t see it happening in Britain as much as in
Germany, for example, or in France or some of the smaller countries like Sweden, or outside
Europe, Japan.
Internationally . . . we have to be realistic about monetary policy. We had near zero interest rates
for so long that we think that’s the norm but it’s not. Capital has a rate of return — that’s what
induces investment. That rate of return should be reflected in the central bank’s interest rate
policy. In a sense, it was unusual circumstances that put interest rates so low.
Here [in the UK], with 1 per cent interest rate from the central bank, we panicked as if to say, “Oh
my god, stagflation is coming. We’ve had it. What are we going to do?” But 1 per cent is still below
what you might consider to be a long-run equilibrium.
DS: So is the new, post-Covid normality going to look more like the old normality?
CP: I think so, yes. With more capital and better quality capital, more automation and, I hope,
more flexibility in labour markets in terms of jobs, working hours, working from home. New forms
of training programmes, rethinking the education system to provide better digital-type education.
Facilities to make it easier for older people to participate, which would involve . . . flexibility on
hours of work, because we do know that older people are bigger users of health services, for
example. If you work from nine to five every day, that becomes difficult but if there’s more
flexibility on how you adjust your hours, even if they are close to 35 a week or whatever full-time is,
then, more of them will come out into the market.
DS: You’ve said recently that people’s experience of

We had near zero interest rates
for so long that we think that’s
the norm, but it’s not

work is very much defined by place. Would that
remain true if we do have a higher degree of remote
working and movement away from urban centres?

CP: That is one of the central themes of the project that the Nuffield Foundation is funding us to
research at the Institute for the Future of Work. I’m in two minds about it. There is no doubt that if
you are in an area of the country where there are many different types of jobs, you will have a
higher rate of return to your experience than if you are elsewhere.
I’ve been involved in various studies that show the biggest gains from experience are in places
where there are the benefits of being close to other economic actors and spillovers from one job to
another. It gives you the possibility of changing jobs, or if your employer doesn’t want to lose you
when there’s an alternative, they are more likely to provide good training and make your
experience more rewarding.
DS: What kinds of places would those be?
CP: London is number one here. In France, it’s Paris. The US has more, because of its size — New
York, Los Angeles, San Francisco, even Texas, Houston and, of course, Boston — the Massachusetts
area. But in Britain, there is hardly anything outside the London area and the surrounding sphere
of influence. France is exactly the same — Paris and the surrounding area is completely dominant.
Now, the really difficult question is, given the new technologies we have and if we do go for more
flexibility in work, whether these benefits could also be achieved elsewhere. I would hope so. We
know from economic geography that you need concentration — even in the US. But do you really
need only one big urban centre? The answer is obviously no. In the UK, Manchester, Liverpool,
Birmingham, Coventry, Wolverhampton, Newcastle, Sunderland could be urban centres that
benefit those living in the surrounding area and where people work remotely with the other big
centres.
That’s what we are working on. I hope it can be achieved. In principle, there is no reason why we
shouldn’t have, say, three or four urban centres instead of one. That will enable people to stay there
rather than be forced to migrate to enjoy more successful careers.
DS: What are you hoping to find out from the review?

CP: Why there are such big gaps in productivity and generally in the types of jobs that are being
created in different areas of the country. Our preliminary findings and thinking is that that’s partly
due to the different skills and types of labour available across Britain. That’s only to some extent
due to migration.
There are also areas where you don’t have the

Why are there so many more
unicorns in the south-east than
in the Manchester area?

mentality that education is good and let’s get more
education. One of the findings of intergenerational
research is that what your parents did is a very
strong influence. In areas where parents used to
leave school at 16 and go into manufacturing, coal

mining, shipbuilding and so on, that’s transmitted to the next generation.
So, that’s a big constraint. Then, there is the migration of university graduates, sizeable fractions
leaving some areas. Obviously, London and the south-east is the biggest attraction for them.
Then, the other aspect, which we haven’t fully investigated yet, is why are employers not adopting
the latest technology in some places? Why are there so many more unicorns in the south-east than
in the Manchester area, for example? We’re trying to find out by collecting our own data.
DS: Beyond the UK, one of the really striking things about the labour market recovery has been
just how good things look in the eurozone, where unemployment is the lowest it’s been since the
euro was created. What’s your view on that and what should be done to make the most of it?
CP: The eurozone is more flexible on the labour market because it still has a big supply of more
reasonably priced labour [from eastern Europe] and there are still big numbers underemployed in
their own countries or in certain jobs. Female employment rates in southern Europe are still very
low and with the rise in education standards, they will increase. Altogether, the fundamentals, if
you like, of the labour market in the eurozone are a lot better than almost anywhere else in the
advanced world.

The problems the eurozone had in the past had to do more with monetary union and whether one
rate of exchange was good for all the countries. But the adjustment seems to have taken place. I
chaired a committee that prepared a report for the Greek government, which looked at these things
in great detail and the exchange rates and financial matters were not really constraints. The
constraints were more like the integration of the public sector in the regulation and openness of the
professions — the old, traditional market rigidity of southern Europe.
Gradually, those have been reformed. Spain was a leader in that reform, Italy under Mario Draghi
is doing it, Greece is doing it now. When you see all those things taking place with the European
Central Bank having put the financial side under control, then there are better prospects for the
eurozone.
The above transcript has been edited for brevity and clarity

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Eurozone economy
Global Economy
Employment
Covid-19
Artificial intelligence

