FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion US economy

Things are only getting harder for the Fed
We should be thankful that the past two weeks of banking stress did not happen sooner

KENNETH ROGOFF

The Marriner S. Eccles Federal Reserve building in Washington. Even after inflation abates, central banks may need to keep the
general level of interest rates higher over the next decade © Al Drago/Bloomberg

Kenneth Rogoff
Published MAR 18 2023

The writer is a professor of economics and public policy at Harvard university and former chief
economist at the IMF
The Fed’s expansive actions to prevent the Silicon Valley Bank collapse from becoming systemic,
followed by the Suisse National Bank’s massive lifeline to troubled Credit Suisse, left little doubt
this week that financial leaders are determined to act decisively when fear starts to set in. Let us
leave moral hazard for another day.

But even if risks of a 2023 financial Armageddon have been contained, not all the differences with
2008 are quite so reassuring. Back then, inflation was a non-issue and deflation — falling prices —
quickly became one. Today, core inflation in the US and Europe is still running hot, and one really
has to strain the definition of “transitory” to argue that it is not a problem. Global debt, both public
and private, has also skyrocketed. This would not be such an issue if forward looking, long-term
real interest rates were to take a deep dive, as they did in the secular stagnation years prior to
2022.
Unfortunately, however, ultra-low borrowing rates are not something that can be counted on this
time around. First and foremost, I would argue that if one looks at long-term historical patterns in
real interest rates (as Paul Schmelzing, Barbara Rossi and I have), major shocks — for example, the
big drop after the 2008 financial crisis — tend to fade over time. There are also structural reasons:
for one thing, global debt (public and private) exploded after 2008, partly as an endogenous
response to the low rates, partly as a necessary response to the pandemic. Other factors that are
pushing up long-term real rates include the massive costs of the green transition and the coming
increase in defence expenditure around the world. The rise of populism will presumably help
alleviate inequality, but higher taxes will lower trend growth even as higher spending adds to
upwards pressure on rates.
What this means is that even after inflation abates, central banks may need to keep the general
level of interest rates higher over the next decade than they did in the last one, just to keep inflation
stable.
Another significant difference between now and post-2008 is the far weaker position of China.
Beijing’s fiscal stimulus after the financial crisis played a key role in maintaining global demand,
particularly for commodities but also for German manufacturing and European luxury goods.
Much of it went into real estate and infrastructure, the country’s massive go-to growth sector.

Today, however, after years of building at breakneck speed, China is running into the same kinds of
diminishing returns as Japan began to experience in the late 1980s (the famous “bridges to
nowhere”) and the former Soviet Union saw in the late 1960s. Combine that with overcentralisation of decision-making, extraordinarily adverse demographics, and creeping
deglobalisation, and it becomes clear that China will not be able to play such an outsized role in
holding up global growth during the next global recession.
Last, but not least, the 2008 crisis came during a period of relative global peace, which is hardly
the case now. The Russian war in Ukraine has been a continuing supply shock that accounts for a
significant part of the inflation problem that central banks are now trying to deal with.
Looking back on the past two weeks of banking stress, we should be thankful that this did not
happen sooner. With sharply rising central bank rates, and a troubled underlying economic
backdrop, it is inevitable that there will be many business casualties and normally emerging
market debtors as well. So far, several low-middle income countries have defaulted, but there are
likely to be more to come. Surely there will be other problems besides tech, for example the
commercial real estate sector in the US, which is hit by rising interest rates even as major city office
occupancy remains only about 50 per cent. Of course the financial system, including lightly
regulated “shadow banks,” must be housing some of the losses.
Advanced economy governments are not all necessarily immune. They may have long since
“graduated” from sovereign debt crises, but not from partial default through surprise high
inflation.
How should the Federal Reserve weigh all these issues in deciding on its rate policy next week?
After the banking tremors, it is certainly not going to forge ahead with a 50 basis point (half a per
cent) increase as the European Central Bank did on Thursday, surprising markets. But then the
ECB is playing catchup to the Fed.

If nothing else, the optics of once again bailing out the financial sector while tightening the screws
on Main Street are not good. Yet, like the ECB, the Fed cannot lightly dismiss persistent core
inflation over 5 per cent. Probably, it will opt for a 25 basis point increase if the banking sector
seems calm again, but if there are still some jitters it could perfectly well say the direction of travel
is still up, but it needs to take a pause.
It is far easier to hold off political pressures in an era where global interest rate and price pressures
are pushing downwards. Not anymore. Those days are over and things are going to get harder for
the Fed. The trade-offs it faces next week might only be the start.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Kenneth Rogoff
Global inflation
US economy
Federal Reserve

