FT PROFESSIONAL

Chris Giles on Central Banks Central banks

Will wage growth keep inflation too high?
There is little sign of a wage price spiral in the US or eurozone, but the UK is on the edge

A national pay dispute called by the trade union Verdi disrupts Germany this month © Reuters

Chris Giles
Published FEB 13 2024

This article is an on-site version of our Chris Giles on Central Banks newsletter. Sign up here to
get the newsletter sent straight to your inbox every Tuesday

Wages matter. Not just for living standards, but for the inflationary process. This week, I am going
to do a deep dive into what we know about pay trends in the US, eurozone and UK. One chart
completely destroyed my previous beliefs and made me reconsider my views. I love it when that
happens because I know I’ve learnt something. Let me know something recently that made you
stop and think. Email me: chris.giles@ft.com

Worrying about wages
There is little today’s central bankers like to do more than worry about excessive wage rises. This is
not a criticism. With wages accounting for roughly 60 per cent of gross domestic product in the US,
eurozone and the UK, rapid pay increases will ultimately drive rapid price rises.
As ever, definitions matter too. The eagle-eyed (most of you) will notice I did not define “rapid” in
the previous paragraph, nor did I explain “ultimately” and nor did I clarify that the labour share in
GDP is also very difficult to measure, particularly in the treatment of self employment income. So
what follows is an attempt to do just that.

The easy bit
One simple part of the wage and inflation story is that when there are no shocks or adjustments,
inflation will be stable and on target if pay is growing at roughly the rate of inflation plus
productivity growth. This is not controversial. It is the amount of wage growth necessary to
maintain a constant share of GDP going to workers (employees and the employment element of
self employment).
If wage growth is lower than this level persistently, as it has long been in Japan and was in
Germany before the pandemic, it can put downward pressure on inflation, leaving countries stuck
in a low inflation trap. The 1970s wage price spirals show the opposite effect.
With productivity growth having been around 1 per cent a year since the global financial crisis
across many advanced economies, annual wage growth of roughly 3 per cent is consistent with a 2
per cent target over time. Top central bankers often mention this, with Fed chair Jay Powell and
deputy governor of the Bank of England, Sir Dave Ramsden, citing these sorts of figures in their
latest press conferences.
The problem is that wage growth is difficult to measure, leaving a lot for interpretation. The data is
often late (in the eurozone especially), can be distorted by the changing composition of the
workforce (an influx of low wage jobs can seemingly depress wage gains), can be of poor quality
(household surveys) and can differ conceptually (for example in whether it looks at just those
moving jobs).

The chart below therefore takes a range of measures for the US, eurozone and UK creating a band
of pay growth indicators. The blue line showing the “headline” rate is the most often quoted figure
for each economy. Click on “Indeed” for the Indeed wage tracker, which measures wages in job
advertisements (and hence only for job movers). That does not apply to everyone, but it is more up
to date and consistent across economies.

Wage growth in the US, eurozone and UK
Annual change in wages (%)
Grey swaths indicate range of wage growth measures for each country
Headline

Indeed

US

eurozone

10

8

6

From the charts, I think you can conclude the following:

Wage growth is still above the long-term level consistent with stable
inflation everywhere

All US measures are declining rapidly to this target. There is evidence this is
also true in the UK, but levels of wage growth are still very high
The eurozone headline data for the third quarter of 2023 is horribly out of
date
Click on the “Indeed” button and you can see that there is more slowing of
wage growth for new hires in all areas, which is a good leading indicator of
wage trends. Levels of wage growth are still too high for long-term stable
inflation

The catch-up
The big problem with the analysis above is that we are not in a long-term steady state. At the
moment wages are also adjusting to the pandemic, the inflationary period and the energy crisis of
recent years. It helps, therefore, to look not only at wage growth but also the level of wages
compared with the level of prices, as I have drawn in the chart below.
The chart was not what I was expecting. For sure, US wage levels have kept up with prices
(roughly) and they have fallen far behind in the eurozone. This was to be expected because
inflation was more demand driven in the US and rapidly rising imported energy prices in 2022
required European consumers to take a real hit to their living standards. Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine made Europe poorer both in absolute terms and relative to the US.

The levels of wages and prices have differed substantially between the US,
eurozone and the UK
Wage and price levels: 2019 Q4 = 100

US

eurozone

130

120

110

But look at the UK. This really surprised me and I had to check the figures carefully. Though
Britain faced almost exactly the same shock as the eurozone, wages kept pace with prices and grew
faster in relative terms than the US since the end of 2019. This is a much more inflationary
dynamic and made me worry I have become too dovish recently about UK monetary policy and the
labour market figures this morning did not help. It is especially surprising since the domestic
narrative in Britain is that households are suffering a cost of living crisis and need a break.

The necessary productivity adjustment
Remember that in the long term, wages can rise by inflation plus productivity growth. The chart
below gives a crude, but internationally comparable, estimate of productivity changes since the
pre-pandemic period. Two things to note here are that there has been next to no growth in
European GDP per employee since late 2019, which is considerably worse than US productivity
growth although that is also far from strong. This suggests the US can sustain higher wage growth
than Europe without generating inflation and explains much of the difference between the US and
eurozone in the previous chart.

The US has a higher level of productivity than before the pandemic, while
eurozone and UK performance has been pretty flat
GDP per person employed
Index: 2019 Q4 = 100

110

100

Pandemic distortions
Pandemic
distortions

It is worth noting the big pandemic distortions in these figures because US companies laid people
off during Covid, temporarily raising measured productivity levels because the low paid were more
likely to lose their jobs, while Europe kept people attached to their employers while output tanked,
lowering measured productivity.

The necessary terms of trade adjustment
Less than a year ago, the BoE chief economist Huw Pill got himself into hot water by saying bluntly
that people had to accept they were “worse off” because the stuff the UK consumes from abroad,
mostly energy, had become more expensive. He had to apologise because his choice of words
suggested he was blaming the public for making his job harder. There is no doubt, however, that
his economics was right. If a country’s imports get a lot more expensive, households or companies
have to take a hit and if everyone tries to protect their real incomes or profits, inflation will persist.
The good news is that for Europe (eurozone and the UK), the huge terms of trade hit from imports
becoming much more expensive compared with exports has disappeared as energy prices have
fallen.

US terms of trade have improved on pre-pandemic levels, while they have
recovered recently in the eurozone and the UK
Ratio of export and import price deflators
Index: 2019 Q4 = 100

110

105

The recovery in Europe’s terms of trade implies the need for real wage cuts to stabilise inflation has
gone for now, and the rise in America’s terms of trade suggests it could have a little more real wage
growth without inflation. Remember, though, that in the US where trade is a small share of GDP,
these effects will not be large.

What can we say about wages?
I think we can say the following:

The levels of wages and prices are more instructive than their current
growth rates, so long as nothing was terribly out of kilter before the
pandemic in late 2019
Everything looks consistent with stable inflation in the US and a little more
real wage growth would be possible without stimulating inflation. Powell
was right to say that the wage outlook appeared “OK”, “healthy” and
“moving in the right direction” in his January press conference
Eurozone pay discipline has been awesome. That was necessary after
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, and now everyone should relax a little. There
is no longer a need for pay to have grown less than prices. This is in line
with the ECB’s forecasts and an important speech last week from Phillip
Lane, chief economist. The ECB forecasts suggest eurozone wage growth
can be above 4.5 per cent in 2024, above 3.5 per cent in 2025 and still
above 3 per cent in 2026, without harming the disinflation process. Pay
recovery is needed
The UK is on the edge. The improvement in the terms of trade makes the
real growth of pay since 2019 sustainable, but there is little room for more
“catch-up” without big productivity gains. The BoE needs to see pay growth
coming down fast

What I’ve been reading and watching
My colleagues have written an explainer on movements in the long-term
neutral interest rate (or r*). As this new ECB research shows, no one really
knows
Turkey shows that wage price spirals are real, but orthodox monetary policy
appears likely to survive the latest change of guard at the central bank

David Zervos argues in the FT that the Fed will underpin the US economy
and stock prices because it can take action to avoid a downturn. This
matters much more for asset prices, he says, than when the first rate cut
will come
For something rather different and concerning, a new working paper says
recessions might be good for mortality and human welfare. If true (I don’t
buy it yet), it upends almost all thinking

A chart that matters
This chart matters because there is next to no action. A huge amount of ink was spilled last week on
whether the seasonal adjustment factors of the US consumer price index would change and
indicate more inflation in recent months. As the chart of seasonally adjusted monthly price
changes before and after revisions showed, they did not.

The monthly rise of the US CPI was similar under the old and new seasonal
adjustment factors
Monthly rise in the CPI (%)

0.6

0.4

Recommended newsletters for you
Free lunch — Your guide to the global economic policy debate. Sign up here
Trade Secrets — A must-read on the changing face of international trade and globalisation.
Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Macroeconomics

EU economy
Global inflation
UK economy
Central banks

