FT PROFESSIONAL

Federal Reserve

Federal Reserve skips rate rise but signals two more increases on the way
Powell defends move to pause tightening campaign in face of persistently high inflation

Jay Powell: ‘Nearly all committee participants view it as likely that some further rate increases will be appropriate this year to bring
inflation to 2 per cent over time’ © Financial Times

Colby Smith in Washington and Kate Duguid in New York
Published JUN 14 2023 | Updated JUN 14 2023, 16:36

The Federal Reserve signalled its support for two more interest rate rises this year, including one
that could be implemented at its next meeting in July, even as it skipped an increase for the first
time in more than a year.
At the end of its two-day gathering on Wednesday, the Federal Open Market Committee voted
unanimously to forgo another quarter-point rate increase and hold the federal funds rate at the
existing target range of between 5 per cent and 5.25 per cent.

But despite the first reprieve in an aggressive monetary tightening campaign that started in March
2022, Fed chair Jay Powell made clear the US central bank intends to squeeze the world’s largest
economy further to bring persistently high inflation under control.
“Nearly all committee participants view it as likely that some further rate increases will be
appropriate this year,” Powell said in a press conference after the rate decision. He added he
expected the meeting next month to be a “live” one, sending a strong hint that the Fed is inclined to
raise rates on July 26.
Most policymakers are projecting two additional quarter-point increases this year in a move that
would lift the benchmark rate to between 5.5 per cent and 5.75 per cent, according to an updated
“dot plot” published on Wednesday that collates officials’ forecasts until the end of 2025.
Despite the Fed’s view that more rate rises are necessary, Powell defended the decision to hold
steady on Wednesday, arguing it was a “prudent” move given how much the central bank has
already tried to damp economic activity. He said the committee had also taken into account
“potential headwinds” from the recent regional banking crisis.
“This is an awkward place for the Fed to be because the communication is really difficult,” said
Michael de Pass of Citadel Securities. “They’re saying there hasn’t been enough progress on
inflation, but also that they’re pausing.”

Fed officials skip rate rise but signal two more to come this year
Each dot represents one FOMC participant's projection for the midpoint of US interest rates (%) from
every meeting since Sept 2022. Boxplot lines indicate first quartile, median and third quartile values
for each annual projection.
June 2023

Mar 2023

Dec 2022

Sept 2022

2024

2025

Longer run

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

2023

Powell said the Fed needed “credible evidence that inflation is topping out and then beginning to
come down” before concluding it had squeezed the economy sufficiently, noting there had been
little progress in bringing core inflation down in recent months.

Most officials forecast that the fed funds rate will decline to 4.6 per cent in 2024 and 3.4 per cent in
2025, both above the respective March estimates, suggesting the Fed intends to keep monetary
policy tighter for longer as it tries to tame inflation.
Following Powell’s press conference, the yield on the two-year Treasury note, which moves with
interest rate expectations, rose to its highest level since mid-March. Traders in the futures market
pared back wagers that the Fed will cut rates this year. US stocks whipsawed, falling at first before
recovering.
In March, when the dot plot was last updated, most policymakers projected the central bank would
not raise rates beyond the current level, in large part because of the aftershocks from the failures of
Silicon Valley Bank and other lenders.
Since then, the economic picture has been mixed, stoking an intense debate among Fed officials
over if and when more rate rises will be needed. Economists polled by the Financial Times last
week predicted the central bank would raise rates at least two more times this year to a range
between 5.5 per cent and 6 per cent.
The latest consumer price index report, released on Tuesday, showed a deceleration in annual
inflation despite persistent price pressures across many segments of the economy. The labour
market has lost some momentum but remains very strong, encouraging consumers to keep
spending.
According to the projections released on Wednesday, most officials now project “core”
inflation, based on the personal consumption expenditures price index, to decline to 3.9 per cent
this year before further slowing to 2.6 per cent in 2024 and 2.2 per cent in 2025.
That suggests inflation will fall more slowly compared with previous forecasts released in March,
when the median estimate for core PCE in 2023 was 3.6 per cent. It is currently hovering at 4.7 per
cent.
Officials also pencilled in much higher growth this year, with the economy expanding by 1 per cent.
That is sharply above the 0.4 per cent estimate released in March. The unemployment rate is
expected to peak at 4.5 per cent in 2024, just shy of the earlier 4.6 per cent forecast.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US economy
US inflation
US interest rates
Central banks
Federal Reserve

