FT PROFESSIONAL

US Treasury bonds

Treasuries sell-off reverberates through global markets
Volatility returns ahead of US election as government debt is hit by stronger economic data

US government bonds are on track for one of their worst months in recent years after strong economic data and an emerging ‘Trump
trade’ forced traders to redraw their interest rate expectations © FT montage/AP

Ian Smith in London and Harriet Clarfelt in New York
Published OCT 25 2024

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
A sell-off in US Treasuries has sent ripples through markets from gold to currencies, as investors
warn that volatility is “locked in” ahead of next month’s presidential election.
US government bonds are on track for one of their worst months in recent years, with 10-year
yields moving up almost 0.4 percentage points to 4.2 per cent after strong economic data and an
emerging “Trump trade” sent traders scrambling to redraw their expectations of the path of
interest rates.

The reversal has come just weeks after the US Federal Reserve signalled that an era of easing had
begun with a half-percentage point cut, prompting investors to expect at least a further quarterpoint cut at both remaining meetings this year.
Now, stronger economic data and bets on the rising chance of a Republican victory leading to
reflationary policies have prompted investors to scale back those bets.
Mike Cudzil, a portfolio manager at Pimco, said investors were “walking back some of the
overzealousness” after the Fed cut.
“It’s a pattern that’s taken hold in markets over the past 18 months,” he said. “Markets really grab a
hold of a narrative and run out that narrative, and outrun the narrative, and take prices too far.”

Rob Burrows, a government bond fund manager at M&G Investments, said some of the dovish bets
had been driven by a “fear of missing out on the rate-cutting cycles” for investors conditioned in
the low-rate era that followed the global financial crisis.

Then with strong job numbers supporting the view that less drastic cuts would be needed, the
“market took fright”, Burrows added. “Sometimes it’s a small door and we all try and run out that
same door.”
The US shift has swept across global markets: the dollar is having its best month in two years
against a basket of currencies, up more than 3 per cent over the past month.
This pushed the yen down below the ¥150 to the dollar level, prompting warnings from officials
about the currency’s weakness, while the Mexican peso — which has been a victim of former
president Donald Trump’s tariff threat on imported cars — has also suffered.
The recent economic data had “poured cold water” on the need for another half-point rate cut, said
Mark Cabana, head of US rates strategy at Bank of America, and “forced” the market to pull back
its expectation of a US recession.
Trading in swaps markets shows there is a significant possibility that the Fed will now hold rates at
one of its two remaining meetings this year. Volatility in the Treasuries market, as measured by the
Ice BofA Move index, this week reached its highest level since the end of last year as traders
adjusted their positions.
“The uncertainty comes from multiple places — the economic fundamentals, the Fed’s reaction
function and the political environment, which could drive changes in fiscal policy,” said Akshay
Singal, global head of short-term interest rate trading at Citigroup.
The path of rate-cutting was “much wider than it has been in the past”, added Singal, saying there
was a plausible scenario in which the Fed did not cut at all in 2025 and another where it cut by 1.25
percentage points or more.
Several investors said the greater volatility and uncertainty came from the market’s greater focus
on jobs data after inflation started to fall.
An unexpectedly weak number in July, which laid the ground for the Fed’s decision for a half-point
cut, was followed two months later by a payrolls report that smashed expectations.

William Vaughan, associate portfolio manager at Brandywine Global Investment Management,
said for global bond markets “volatility is locked in for the short to medium term” as investors
await the UK Budget, US election and key central bank decisions.
Added to this have been expectations that a shortening in the election odds for Trump has
increased the likelihood of tariffs, tax cuts and other policies that will stoke domestic inflation, and
put upward pressure on bond yields.
Strategists have pointed to the rise in the so-called term premium — the proportion of long-term
bond yields that does not reflect near-term interest rate expectations — as a proxy for the concerns
of investors about heavy borrowing by governments.
Fiscal and political uncertainties have lifted other haven assets such as precious metals, helping to
propel gold to a record high.

Treasuries investors are now girding for a prolonged period of uncertainty through the election but
also on the economy, with strikes and hurricanes in October expected to make that month’s US job
data hard to read.
“It’s going to be difficult to decipher where we are in the US [economic cycle] because that data is
going to be quite noisy,” said Laura Cooper, head of macro credit at asset manager Nuveen.
Still, some investors now warn that yields might have risen too high, in what is still expected to be
an easing cycle for the US and most other major central banks.
Jim Caron, chief investment officer of the portfolio solutions group at Morgan Stanley Investment
Management, highlighted that inflation had been trending lower and the Fed was still expected to
cut.
“In the end, bond yields may remain contained and this is not likely [to be] the start of a new trend
to higher yields [but] just an adjustment.”

The “pendulum has swung the other way” from investors overestimating how much the Fed would
cut to understating it, argued Ed Al-Hussainy, senior global rates strategist at Columbia
Threadneedle Investments.
“My sense is markets at the moment, because they’re so euphoric about growth, so hypersensitive
about fiscal deficits increasing . . . [they] are underpricing how much the Fed will have to do. This is
a bet I’m placing.”

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US Treasury bonds
US interest rates
Markets volatility
Federal Reserve
Ian Smith

