FT PROFESSIONAL

Charts that Matter US interest rates

Traders bet on interest rate cuts from Jay Powell’s successor at the Fed
Donald Trump’s criticism of central bank chair has fuelled expectations of a dovish shift once he leaves in
May next year

Jay Powell has pushed back against the possibility of a July interest rate cut and not reacted to the president’s repeated demands ©
Jim Lo Scalzo/EPA-EFE/Shutterstock

Kate Duguid in New York
Published JUN 28 2025

Traders are increasing their bets on US interest rate cuts after Jay Powell leaves the Federal
Reserve next year, as the central bank chief faces a barrage of criticism from Donald Trump for
moving too slowly in lowering borrowing costs.

Markets are anticipating at least five quarter-point cuts by the end of next year, according to
futures pricing, compared with four at most a month ago. The change in expectations is partly
down to rate-setters tempering their view on the inflationary effects of tariffs. But analysts say it
also reflects the president’s constant haranguing of Powell as “Mr Too Late”, which has fanned
expectations he will appoint a more dovish successor.
“The more notable shift over the past month is in cuts priced for the middle of next year, as the
market seems to increasingly anticipate ongoing easing once the next Fed chair is in place,” wrote
Matthew Raskin, head of US rates research at Deutsche Bank in a recent note to clients.

Traders are betting on faster and deeper cuts from the Fed
Fed funds rate implied by futures prices (%)
Today

One month ago

4.2

Jay
Powell's
last
meeting
as Fed
chair

4
3.8
3.6
3.4
3.2
3
Aug 25

Oct 25

Dec 25

Feb 26

Apr 26

Jun 26

Aug 26

Oct 26

Dec 26
Source: LSE

Trump said in a post on Truth Social on Wednesday that he had narrowed his search for the next
Fed chair to “three or four people”. He added: “I mean [Powell] goes out pretty soon, fortunately,
because I think he’s terrible.”

Treasury secretary Scott Bessent and Kevin Warsh, who served as a Fed governor during the 2008
financial crisis, are widely believed to be among front runners for the job. Fed governor
Christopher Waller, who this week endorsed a rate cut as soon as July, is also under consideration.
“I think that the prevailing market wisdom is that whoever replaces Powell is going to be more
dovish. It doesn’t mean that they will be non-responsive to the realities of the economy, but they
may be more amenable to [lowering rates],” said Ian Lyngen, head of US rates strategy at BMO
Capital Markets.
While candidates such as Warsh have historically been more hawkish than dovish, Lyngen said
that might change in the current environment.
He said: “Trump has been extremely critical of Powell. The people who are under consideration are
currently auditioning for the job. To look at prior performance and map it to future performance is
not right in this instance.”
Expectations have mounted in recent months that the Fed may appoint a “shadow chair” in
advance of the end of Powell’s term who could signal a more dovish direction on rates. The White
House said a decision on Powell’s replacement was not “imminent”.
Comments from Fed policymakers have also stoked expectations of faster cuts. Governor Michelle
Bowman joined Waller this week in saying she supports cutting rates as soon as July, citing lowerthan-expected inflation.
The two- and five-year Treasury yields, which are sensitive to rate expectations, reached twomonth lows this week as investors priced in the possibility of more rate cuts in the medium-term.
But Powell has pushed back against the possibility of a July cut and has not reacted to Trump’s
repeated demands, largely because of inflation risks. At a speech in Congress on Tuesday, Powell
said that cuts were off the table until the autumn, as the central bank was expecting to see the
effects of Trump’s tariffs on prices in June and July.
Consumer price inflation accelerated slightly in May to a rate of 2.4 per cent, though the rise was
smaller than economists had predicted.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Trump tariffs
Global Economy
US economy
US inflation
US interest rates

