FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion The FT View

What central bankers must tackle at Jackson Hole
Monetary policymakers are on divergent paths, but face common threats

THE EDITORIAL BOARD

US Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell, left, European Central Bank president Christine Lagarde, centre, and Bank of England governor
Andrew Bailey © FT montage/Reuters/EPA/Bloomberg

The editorial board
Published AUG 20 2025

At last year’s Jackson Hole symposium in Wyoming, central bankers were in a quietly confident
mood. Across the US and Europe, the post-pandemic surge in inflation was well on its way down,
job markets were sturdy, and interest-rate cutting cycles were just getting started. The 2025
confab, which starts on Thursday, will be a far more apprehensive affair. Rate-setters at the US
Federal Reserve, European Central Bank and Bank of England are now on divergent paths, and
each faces tricky decisions in the coming weeks and months.

In the US, the Fed’s elevated interest rates are squeezing the economy, but President Donald
Trump’s tariff agenda is increasingly putting upward pressure on prices. This is paving the way for
a contentious committee meeting in September. In the Eurozone, the ECB is concerned that the
global trade war could now cause inflation to undershoot its 2 per cent target for an extended
period. The central bank has already slashed the cost of credit by 200 basis points since June last
year.
Meanwhile, in Britain, inflation — which hit 3.8 per cent in July — has been trending higher in
recent months, partly because of increases in regulated energy prices, the minimum wage and
payroll taxes. The BoE is split on whether it should look through these one-off price level increases.

Inflation hasn't settled at 2 per cent targets
Annual growth rate (%)
Euro area HICP

12

10

8

6

US CPI

UK CPI

Still, for all the distinct monetary policy dilemmas, there are three common problems that central
bankers should begin to address at this year’s conference.
First, with Trump putting the Fed’s independence under increasing pressure, rate-setters must
reiterate the crucial importance of keeping politics out of monetary policy. The president’s goading
of Fed chair Jay Powell and his plans to replace him, possibly with a more amenable leader, should
concern central bankers everywhere. An unstable Fed risks wreaking havoc across global financial
markets. Economists are also more generally concerned that high public debt and rising borrowing
costs in advanced economies will raise political incentives for governments to pressure central
bankers for looser policy.

Co-ordinated on the way up, less so on the way down
Central bank policy rate (%)
ECB

4

Fed

BoE

Second, poor economic data is becoming a growing problem. A decline in survey response rates,
particularly since the pandemic, has meant central bankers are having to base critical monetary
policy decisions on unreliable statistics. The BoE is making do with dodgy jobs data, as the UK’s
Office for National Statistics sluggishly revamps its sampling. In the US, the Bureau of Labor
Statistics faces similar difficulties. This month, a significant unfavourable revision to non-farm
payrolls data triggered an egregious sacking of its chief by Trump. Monetary policymakers should
voice support for better-resourced independent statistics agencies, and collaborate on how best to
plug information gaps with alternative data.
Third, central bankers ought to assess how they can improve their ability to map the effects of
government decisions on inflation. Right now, policies on taxation, spending and import duties are
impacting economies faster than the blunt tools of monetary policy can remedy them. With state
interventionism seemingly on the rise, central banks will need to ensure they have the knowledge
base and tools to project politics, policy and economic dynamics together.
If central bankers use this year’s gathering to reinforce their independence, share insights and
adapt to a shifting political economy, it will be time well spent. They may face disparate rate
choices ahead. But at a time when the economic and foreign policy decisions of political elites seem
erratic, Jackson Hole offers a rare global stage for steady, unified and detail-driven leadership.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
The editorial board
The FT View
Global Economy
US economy
Central banks

