FT PROFESSIONAL

Federal Reserve

Top Federal Reserve official warns US central bank may need to raise interest rates again
Michelle Bowman says immigration and heavy federal spending threaten to undo progress on inflation

Michelle Bowman said it was ‘possible’ that the divergence in strategy between the Federal Reserve and other central banks would
widen over the coming months © Bloomberg

Claire Jones in Washington
Published JUN 25 2024 | Updated JUN 25 2024, 12:49

A top Federal Reserve official has backed more interest rate rises if inflation sticks at its current
level, saying immigration and aggressive fiscal stimulus are likely to keep US prices rising more
quickly than in other rich economies.
Michelle Bowman, one of the Fed’s governors and a voter on its rate-setting Federal Open Market
Committee, said she remained “willing to raise” borrowing costs again “should progress on
inflation stall or even reverse”.

Bowman’s remarks came in a speech on Tuesday in London, and point to the debate within the Fed
about whether the bank can begin cutting interest rates this year, or at all before November’s
presidential election.
Another Fed governor, Lisa Cook, said on Tuesday in New York that she believed that inflation was
likely to fall “more sharply” next year and that “at some point” it would be necessary to cut rates “to
maintain a healthy balance in the economy”.
President Joe Biden has made the economy and his efforts to beat back inflation part of his reelection campaign amid voter anxiety over the high costs of fuel, food and other goods, as well as
mortgage rates.
US inflation jumped to more than 7 per cent in 2022, as the economy recovered from the Covid-19
pandemic, prompting the Fed to raise rates from near zero to 5.25-5.5 per cent, their highest level
in two decades. Inflation has fallen since then, but remained at 2.7 per cent in April, above the
central bank’s 2 per cent target.
Bowman is among the FOMC’s most hawkish members — and even she did not think that a rate
rise this year was the likeliest scenario. But four of 19 officials who attend the committee also
revealed earlier this month that they expect to make no rate cuts this year.
Another seven expect just one quarter-point cut, potentially pushing a decision back to the Fed’s
final meeting of the year in December.
The remaining eight members think two cuts are likely, with several members of the committee
saying over the past week there were signs the US economy was weakening and price pressures
dissipating.
Investors are still betting that the Fed will cut by a quarter-point in mid-September, the central
bank’s final meeting before the election.
However, Bowman said there remained “upside risks” to inflation — including that looser financial
conditions and the federal government’s stimulus, “could add momentum to demand, stalling any
further progress or even causing inflation to accelerate”.

The independent Congressional Budget Office expects the US’s fiscal deficit to hit 7 per cent of the
country’s output this year.
A surge in immigration could also push up housing costs, with construction yet to catch up with
demand, Bowman argued.
But Cook said she expected housing-related inflation to ease in 2025, and for three- and six-month
rates to continue to ebb this year as consumers became less tolerant of higher costs for goods.
“Several national retailers have announced plans to lower prices on certain items, and there is
increasing evidence that higher-income shoppers are trading down to discount stores,” she said.
The Fed’s decision to keep interest rates higher for even longer comes as G7 counterparts such as
Canada and Eurozone members — Italy, Germany and France — have begun cutting borrowing
costs.
Speaking in London, Bowman said it was “possible” that the divergence in strategy between the
Fed and other central banks would widen over the coming months.
“Inflation and labour market developments in the US have unfolded differently in recent quarters
compared to many other advanced economies, likely reflecting a more open immigration policy
and significantly larger discretionary stimulus since the pandemic,” she said.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
US economy
US inflation
US interest rates
Federal Open Market Committee US

