FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion US inflation

Post-pandemic fiscal spending bears much of the blame for US inflation
While the Fed was behind the curve, government policies fuelled demand in a supply-constrained economy

GLENN HUBBARD

Traders react as Fed chair Jay Powell speaks. While the price level jump from spending is permanent, inflation should revert to trend
if the Fed pursues policies consistent with its 2% objective © Brendan McDermid/Reuters

Glenn Hubbard
Published NOV 14 2022

The writer is a professor at Columbia Business School, author of ‘The Wall and the Bridge’ and
was chair of the Council of Economic Advisers under President George W Bush

US inflation has been extremely high since the economy emerged from Covid-19 (although annual
consumer price growth slowed to 7.7 per cent in October). Much analysis of this phenomenon has
centred on the mix between “supply” and “demand” factors and Federal Reserve policy errors.
While both areas are important, so, too, are fiscal spending excesses. Understanding this can offer
lessons to policymakers about what to do now and how best to respond in future crises.
During the pandemic recovery, supply factors such as high energy prices, broken supply chains and
business closures played a part in fuelling inflation. Research by Julian di Giovanni at the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York suggests that supply shocks may account for 40 per cent of inflation,
with the remaining 60 per cent explained by shocks to aggregate demand. Certainly excess demand
remains a very important generator of high inflation.
The Fed’s expansionary monetary policy in the post-pandemic period, along with forward guidance
and a new framework suggesting the maintenance of these policies, raised demand in an economy
hit by supply constraints. Even as early as late 2020, the Fed was arguably behind the curve. By not
raising the federal funds rate until spring 2022, it lost control of inflation. But while the central
bank can be faulted for misjudging the state of aggregate demand and remaining behind the curve
for so long, fiscal policy also contributed significantly to pushing up inflation.
The Covid-19 experience is instructive. While the initial economic shock reflected supply chain
disruptions and lockdowns, there were real risks of sharp declines in aggregate demand from job
losses and lost production and investment. Fast-moving responses such as the Cares Act, passed in
March 2020, focused on maintaining worker incomes and business continuity during the
lockdown. Early action did forestall a collapse in aggregate demand but as the economy’s recovery
took hold, additional federal spending — particularly the blowout in the American Rescue Act —
added to demand in a supply-constrained economy. Again, this proved a recipe for inflation.

Economists, notably John Cochrane of the Hoover Institution, have formalised the link between
fiscal policy and inflation. Suppose, Cochrane has argued, that during the pandemic and the
recovery, the government significantly increased expenditure, electing not to cut other spending or
raise taxes (this is, in fact, similar to the fiscal path followed). And suppose also that the
government will not default on Treasury bonds issued. To cover the higher borrowing, “revenue”
must come from reduced values of nominal debt via higher inflation. Accommodating the abovebaseline spending in the Trump and Biden administrations would require a burst of inflation in the
short term to reduce the real debt value.
Under this interpretation, inflation will remain elevated until the cumulative effect on the price
level reduces the real value of the debt sufficiently to pay for the higher spending. Because this
increase in prices was largely unanticipated, nominal interest rates on Treasury issuances did not
at first rise. And, while the price level jump from spending is permanent, inflation should revert to
trend if the Fed pursues policies consistent with its 2 per cent inflation objective.
To consider excessive government spending as a culprit along with the Fed’s loose monetary policy,
it is useful to draw a contrast with policy in the global financial crisis of 2008 and the subsequent
economic recovery. As in the pandemic, the Fed kept short-term nominal rates at zero for a long
time and expanded its balance sheet more than fourfold. Both inflation and inflationary
expectations remained anchored at around 2 per cent — with actual inflation sometimes lower —
during the decade after the onset of the financial crisis. A key difference, though, was that fiscal
policy expansion was comparatively weak relative to that of the pandemic recovery.
Particularly following last week’s midterm election results, there are three lessons for today’s
policymakers. First, large spending increases in a crisis have consequences for inflation and not
just for real aggregate demand in the economy. Second, to reduce the risks of spending blowouts
and attendant inflation, policymakers could consider pre-committing to more modest spending in
response — on unemployment insurance benefits, individual rebates and/or transfers to state —
triggered by changes in output or employment. Finally, despite the temporary fiscal surge, the Fed
should pursue monetary policy consistent with its long-term objectives for inflation.
Letter in response to this article:

Released savings glut is US inflation villain of the piece / From Emeritus Professor, Albion M
Urdank, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, US

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Glenn Hubbard
US inflation
Covid-19
Federal Reserve

