FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Unhedged

The market looks ahead to the Fed’s rate cut
Investors are betting on 50 basis points and expect a soft landing for the economy

ROBERT ARMSTRONG

As of yesterday, 66% of investors surveyed by Bloomberg expected 50 basis points cut by the Federal Reserve © AP

Robert Armstrong and Aiden Reiter
Published SEP 18 2024 | Updated SEP 18 2024, 09:40

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
This article is an on-site version of our Unhedged newsletter. Premium subscribers can sign up
here to get the newsletter delivered every weekday. Standard subscribers can upgrade to
Premium here, or explore all FT newsletters

Two and a half years after it started raising rates, the Federal Reserve is set to cut them on
Wednesday. Here’s a quick summary of how we see the market going into this announcement:
Investors are betting on 50 basis points. Markets have expected a quarter point cut for a
while, but reports late last week that the Fed is mulling a half point changed the outlook. As of
yesterday, 66 per cent of investors surveyed by Bloomberg expected 50 basis points. The futures
market implies roughly the same odds.
The market seems to be responding not to economic news (there hasn’t been much in the past few
days, other than a strongish retail sales report), but rather what they perceive to be messaging from
the Fed. We will find out today whether investors have been over-reading the tea leaves.
Investors expect a soft landing. According to Bank of America’s Global Fund Manager Survey
which came out yesterday, 79 per cent of fund managers are expecting a soft landing — the highest
reading since May of 2023:

It makes sense that bets on “no landing”, or inflation staying higher while the economy steams
ahead, have decreased, as inflation has come down towards target. It is interesting, though, that
the proportion of investors who see a “hard landing” recession has not moved much — it is the
same today as it was in March, May, and July.

The market has been strong recently — and tech has not been in the driver’s seat. The
S&P 500 has had a decent run since the market rout in late July, despite a flinch at the beginning of
this month. Yesterday it briefly hit a record intraday high. For much of August, that run was being
driven by defences such as consumer staples and healthcare, and rate plays like real estate and
financials. Tech stocks, which had powered the S&P for much of the past two years, seemed to be
falling off. At the time, we said it might be a sign of regime change.
That’s still a possibility. While in the past week the market has been powered by tech stocks again,
the general direction of travel since July has been away from tech/growth and towards
defensives/rate plays/value. Here is the ratio of consumer staples returns to tech returns, and the
ratio of the Russell value index to the Russell growth index:

Tech resurgence?
Ratio of value to growth (left axis)

Market
rout

Ratio of staples to tech (right axis)

0.24

0.5
0.22

0.45

0.2

0.18
0.4
01/03/2024 01/04/2024 01/05/2024 01/06/2024 01/07/2024 01/08/2024 01/09/2024 01/10/2024
Source: Bloomber

The market can be seen as a “frightened” bull. We’re still in a bull market, and sentiment
remains strong — but caution is creeping in. The American Association of Individual Investors
sentiment survey peaked back in January, and while it has remained at a high level, it is working its
way lower:

Citibank’s Levkovich index, a sentiment gauge which draws on the AAII data but also a variety of
other indicators from short interest to gasoline prices, also remains very positive. But it has backed
away from extreme “euphoria” recently:

Investors have not been piling leverage on to their trades, as one would expect if sentiment was at a
fever pitch. Here is margin debt in US trading accounts (note this series only runs to July):

Part of the hesitation may be down to the fact that expectations for global growth — and in
particular Chinese growth — are pretty low, even while the US charges along. This pessimism,
combined with confidence that inflation is behind us, explains the deep unpopularity of
commodities:

One can also see some nerves in the VVIX index, which gives an indication of expected volatility in
the market. It has mostly been above its panic threshold of about 90 since the market tumble in
late July, suggesting the market is expecting some major price swings:

Options investors are on the fence. The put/call ratio on the S&P 500, which can indicate
how bearish or bullish investors are, has been within its typical range for the past few weeks:

On its face, that is a bit surprising given the importance of today’s meeting. “Between now and
year-end ahead, the only event with a higher implied [market] move is the [US] elections,” said
Vishal Vivek of Citi. “We think the probability of S&P options breaking even [today] is high” — or
that increases in puts and calls on the S&P 500 today may cancel each other out, as there is not a
clear consensus on which way the market will move.
Russell Rhoads of Indiana University at Bloomington added: “Investors are just not paying up for
options to a point where it looks like there is an overwhelming move one way or another
tomorrow.”
In sum: The bull market continues, with sentiment and prices near highs. Investors clearly have
doubts about global growth, and are alert to the possibility that the US jobs market is declining
outright, rather than normalising. Hence the popularity of defensive stocks. But these worries are
at the periphery. There is more scope for disappointment than for positive surprises, and the Fed
will have to remain on alert.
(Reiter and Armstrong)

One Good Read
Homo declinis.
robert.armstrong@ft.com and aiden.reiter@ft.com.

FT Unhedged podcast
Can’t get enough of Unhedged? Listen to our
new podcast, for a 15-minute dive into the
latest markets news and financial headlines,
twice a week. Catch up on past editions of
the newsletter here.

Recommended newsletters for you
Due Diligence — Top stories from the world of corporate finance. Sign up here
Chris Giles on Central Banks — Vital news and views on what central banks are thinking,
inflation, interest rates and money. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Robert Armstrong
Unhedged
Equities
Markets
Federal Reserve

