FT PROFESSIONAL

US Treasury bonds

Investors’ use of Fed overnight facility falls to lowest in a year
Usage of reverse repo facility falls by more than $200bn over past month as money market funds slowly
move into Treasuries

The Federal Reserve’s overnight reverse repo facility was established permanently in 2014, and is designed to suck up excess cash in
the financial system © FT montage/Bloomberg/AFP Getty Images

Kate Duguid in New York
Published JUN 30 2023

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
Usage of a Federal Reserve facility that allows investors to park their cash overnight has dropped to
its lowest level in a year, as US money market funds instead add to their holdings of government
debt.

Investors last Thursday stashed $1.93tn in the Fed’s overnight reverse repo facility (RRP), where
cash is stored risk-free for a generous return, the lowest amount in a year. Although it rose slightly
on Friday, likely due to month-end flows, the total is down by more than $200bn over the past
month.
US government money market mutual funds, which manage $4.5tn, aim to offer clients an ultrasafe and ultra-liquid product that delivers relatively stable returns. They typically place most of
their cash in short-term Treasury bills, but volatility in those yields in the last two years — as the
Fed has raised interest rates aggressively — has pushed money funds into RRP, which delivers riskfree, predictable returns. A shortage of bills for the past few years has also driven demand.
The RRP facility was established permanently in 2014, and is designed to suck up excess cash in
the financial system. Money funds, the biggest users of the facility, largely avoided using it until
2021. Ballooning usage since then has helped drain some liquidity from the banking system, which
has become a concern this year as banks have struggled to hold on to deposits.
Regulators and analysts have long expected usage of RRP to sink, especially since the start of June
as the government has flooded the market with Treasury bills.
While RRP levels have finally begun to fall, analysts say they expected that to happen more quickly
than it has given a burst of short-term debt issuance by the US government, which is replenishing
coffers that were depleted during the debt ceiling fight. The reluctance of money market funds to
plough headfirst back into Treasury bills betrays a lingering unease about the direction of US
interest rates as inflation remains stubbornly high.
“We have been surprised that more money hasn’t left the reverse repo facility,” said Mark Cabana,
head of US rates strategy at Bank of America. That slower than expected drop, Cabana said, is
because yields on Treasury bills have not risen enough to compensate money funds for the risk of
holding debt that would lose value if the Fed raises interest rates again.

Cabana expects the Treasury department to issue roughly $1tn worth of bills from the start of June
to the end of August. Compared with the $410bn in bills issued since the debt ceiling agreement
was reached on June 2, RRP has come down by just over $200bn, far less than Cabana and his
team were expecting.
Brandon Swensen, a portfolio manager at BlueBay Fixed Income, said the group’s funds have a
short average maturity, implying they have not been buying many of these new Treasury bills, and
they are expecting to stay focused on short maturities. “We really don’t want to be putting money
to work when we’re not getting paid for the hikes the Fed still has yet to do.”

In moments when the Fed is raising interest rates, Treasury bills currently on the market tend to
reflect the expected rate increases through higher yields. Yields on Treasury bills have moved a
little higher since the central bank indicated at June’s rate-setting meeting that it expects to raise
interest rates twice more this year — but not yet enough to fully reflect the risks of more rate
increases.

The RRP currently pays an annualised 5.05 per cent return, while the comparable rate on
Treasuries, which carry more risk, is roughlyp 5.26 er cent.
With money funds only buying some of the Treasury bills on offer, that has left the remainder to be
sucked up by other investors such as companies, state and local governments, and individuals. If
that trend continues, it could add to the ongoing drain on bank deposits, which have been falling
since the collapse of several regional lenders in the US earlier this year.
“Money funds have been buying more Treasury bills, but they’ve been more than happy for
individuals and other investors to take down a bigger share than they normally would,” said Peter
Crane, the head of Crane Data, which tracks the money market fund industry.
Cash that flows into the government’s coffers to pay for new T-bills in effect leaves the banking
system. Money stashed in the RRP similarly acts as a drain on overall levels of liquidity in the
system. That means a burst of borrowing without a corresponding decline in use of the Fed facility
could place further strain on the banking system, analysts say.
“If money funds are using RRP, it suggests someone else is going to have to buy the bills, so bank
reserves are going to have to fall more,” said Tom Simons, a money market economist at Jefferies.
Additional reporting by Harriet Clarfelt

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US Treasury bonds
US interest rates
Federal Reserve
Kate Duguid

