FT PROFESSIONAL

Chris Giles on Central Banks Federal Reserve

The mounting challenges to Fed independence
Economists disagree, financial markets do not care, the public are fickle and the Supreme Court is not to be
trusted

There is agreement that independence should not be a goal in its own right © FT montage/Bloomberg

Chris Giles
Published NOV 4 2025

This article is an on-site version of our Chris Giles on Central Banks newsletter. Premium
subscribers can sign up here to get the newsletter delivered every Tuesday. Standard
subscribers can upgrade to Premium here, or explore all FT newsletters

After almost a year of Donald Trump’s sustained attacks, the Federal Reserve is under pressure. If
presidential name-calling, threats to fire Fed chair Jay Powell, an ongoing attempt to fire Fed
governor Lisa Cook and an explicit demand for lower interest rates to alleviate the cost of
government debt were not enough, the Fed is also accused by Treasury secretary Scott Bessent of
exceeding its powers since the financial crisis.
With this background, the Peterson Institute for International Economics could not have picked a
better time for last week’s excellent conference on central bank independence, which was
admirably free of pearl clutching and unrealistic defences of everything the Fed has done.
Everyone agreed that independence should not be a goal in its own right and the right to set
monetary policy free from political interference was justified only by results. That was about as
reassuring as it got for central bankers.

Economists disagreed
After allowing US banks to become too big to fail, getting involved in climate policy and overseeing
10 per cent inflation, there is some significant support among economists for Bessent’s view that
the Fed’s poor choices in the past have highlighted excessive independence and this should be
reined in. John Cochrane of the Hoover Institution, for example, felt that the Fed needed a much
more limited mandate to operate independent of government and much stronger lines of
accountability.
His view generated a typically provocative response from Larry Summers of Harvard and a former
Treasury secretary. Summers said that any complaints about the Fed exceeding its mandate were
“not among the top 100 problems that the nation faces” and, instead, said much greater harm
could come from the Trump administration’s threats to the central bank.
“Were there to be the idea that the Fed should subordinate itself to unconventional ideas about
monetary policy driven and generated by the executive branch of the US on an ongoing basis, that
would be, with overwhelming probability, adverse to the interests of the republic and a higher
order issue and a higher order concern,” Summers said.

Markets are not bothered
However worked up economists get about threats to the Fed, financial markets have been calm all
through 2025.
Francesco Bianchi of Johns Hopkins University presented updates to his previous work showing
that Trump’s rude comments about the Fed on social media in his first term led to a statistically
significant drop in financial markets expectations for the fed funds rate. Bianchi found this has
been the same in 2025, showing that markets think Trump’s threats work and the Fed responds
with lower rates.
For longer-term time horizons, however, the president’s words do not have much power, but nor
was there any sign of bond vigilantes limiting the president’s actions with expectations of higher
inflation.
Randy Kroszner, former Fed governor and Bank of England Financial Policy Committee member,
noted that there had been little financial market concern that Trump’s actions would lead to higher
medium-term inflation rates (chart below).

Financial market inflation expectations have been well behaved despite
Trump's threats to the Federal Reserve
Annual CPI inflation rate (%)
Five-year inflation expectations after the first five years
10-year inflation expectations

Five-year inflation expectations

4

3

2

Perhaps this non-reaction was because Fed independence was not that important, perhaps because
the threats had not been that bad, perhaps because the candidates for next Fed chair were seen as
credible, perhaps because the Supreme Court was treating the Fed differently from other public
bodies or perhaps because the US dollar is the world’s primary reserve currency.
All these reasons were plausible. But no one could prove their pet theory because all explanations
were consistent with the facts. The upshot, however, is clear. Bond vigilantes are not coming to
rescue the Fed from threats to its independence.

Lawyers worry
One of the main theories why markets have been sanguine was that the US Supreme Court has
made it clear it will treat the Fed differently to other US government agencies. In May, when ruling
that an official could not return to her job while her case against being fired without cause was
going through the courts, the majority on the Court said the Fed was a different beast to other
agencies.
“The Federal Reserve is a uniquely structured, quasi-private entity that follows in the distinct
historical tradition of the First and Second Banks of the United States,” it said.
This ruling appears to have reassured many in markets and economics, but lawyers worry about
the lack of principle or logic behind the Supreme Court’s position.
Stephen Vladeck, of Georgetown Law School, said that “in its rush to embrace the unitary executive
theory . . . [the Supreme Court] still wants to come up with some way to carve out the Fed even if
that way is completely, utterly and unredeemably analytically unpersuasive”.
The weakness of the Supreme Court’s arguments might well mean the Fed is not as safe as it
thought in May, especially with the Court having to rule on Trump’s definition of “cause” in the
Lisa Cook case next year.

Public legitimacy waning
If lawyers were not as optimistic as financial markets, nor were academics who have been
examining public attitudes to the Fed. They recall that in Milton Friedman’s 1962 essay Should
There Be An Independent Monetary Authority, the economist asked whether it was “really
tolerable in a democracy to have so much power concentrated in a body free from any kind of
direct, effective political control”.

The answer to Friedman’s question, according to Carola Binder of University of Texas at Austin,
was that legitimacy of Fed independence in the eyes of the public is what makes it tolerable. But
she added that there were ample warning signs that Fed legitimacy was on shaky ground, especially
with attitudes towards the agency becoming increasingly partisan. As the chart below shows,
Trump’s attacks on the Fed have undermined its legitimacy among Republicans this year with a
plurality disapproving of its actions.

Approval scores for Jay Powell as chair of the Federal Reserve (%)
Strongly or somewhat approve

Not sure

Strongly or somewhat disapprove

US adult citizens

Democrats
Independents
Republicans

Don’t reason from a price change
Last week I highlighted remarkable research showing that US 10-year government borrowing costs
decreased only on days around Fed meetings until 2022. Then, I attributed the breakdown of this
relationship since then to the Fed’s waning influence. When the Fed meets, borrowing costs fall,
but they have risen sharply at other times since 2022.
There is nothing wrong with the numbers, but a few readers worried about the inference I drew.
The same Randy Kroszner who was speaking at the Peterson conference got in touch to say that the
movements might be a sign of better Fed communication, with markets knowing more about the
Fed’s reaction function further ahead of meetings, so those dates no longer matter so much.

He’s right. That is a plausible alternative explanation, although we cannot distinguish between
waning influence and clearer communication from the price change alone. Yet another example of
why it is dangerous to reason from a price change.

What I’ve been reading and watching
In her first speech since Donald Trump started a process of attempting to
fire her, Fed governor Lisa Cook placed views bang in the middle of others
on the Federal Open Market Committee on Monday. She saw risks to both
sides of the Fed’s prices and employment mandates and was watching
things carefully. Although Cook said explicitly she could not comment on
her legal case, she showed a sense of humour, saying “one day if I ever get
back into the classroom — and I don’t want to do that too soon — this is a
teachable moment”. (50 mins)

The five candidates to be Fed chair unless Trump picks Bessent instead
The Fed says a December cut is not a foregone conclusion, while the
European Central Bank is still in a good place
US financial deregulation marches on

One last chart
Alberto Cavallo, Paola Llamas and Franco Vazquez have a new paper comparing detailed prices
charged by major US retailers and Trump’s tariffs on the same goods. I have highlighted the rise in
import prices relative to domestically produced goods before but the paper has been extended to
include an estimate that tariffs have added 0.7 percentage points to US inflation in September.
Instead of the 3 per cent inflation in September reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, it would
have been around 2.3 per cent without tariffs. The tariff effect has been adding gradually but the
authors estimate that pass through is still only 20 per cent because retailers have been taking the
pain so far.
The chart below shows the latest results and is generated by the researchers estimating a pre-tariff
trend in prices of a disaggregated series of goods and the divergence of that trend after tariffs were
imposed. It’s a rough and ready approach, but gives a sense of the important counterfactual: what
would US inflation have been without Trump’s tariffs.

Trump's tariffs have raised US inflation by 0.7 percentage points since
March
Deviation from CPI trend (percentage points)

0.8

0.6

0.4

Recommended newsletters for you
Free Lunch — Your guide to the global economic policy debate. Sign up here
The Lex Newsletter — Lex, our investment column, breaks down the week’s key themes, with
analysis by award-winning writers. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy

US economy
Central banks
Federal Reserve
Chris Giles on Central Banks

