FT PROFESSIONAL

US inflation

Federal Reserve’s preferred inflation metric edges down to 2.6%
Markets continue to bet on prospect of interest rate cuts from US central bank by end of 2024

The Federal Reserve’s next rate-setting vote is on July 31, while its September meeting is the final policy decision before the US
presidential election © Bloomberg

Claire Jones in Washington and Harriet Clarfelt in New York
Published JUN 28 2024 | Updated JUN 28 2024, 16:08

US inflation eased to 2.6 per cent in the year to May, according to the metric the Federal Reserve
uses to set its target for price pressures, keeping the central bank on course for at least one interest
rate cut this year.
Friday’s data, published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis, on the personal consumption
expenditures index was in line with economists’ expectations that headline US inflation would dip
slightly from 2.7 per cent in April.

“Core” PCE, which ignores changes in food and fuel prices, was 2.6 per cent, in line with
expectations of economists polled by Reuters of a 0.2 percentage point drop from 2.8 per cent in
April. It was the lowest reading since March 2021.
The Fed’s target for headline PCE index is 2 per cent a year.
The month-on-month headline rate was flat, while core prices edged up by just one-tenth of a
percentage point — readings that are in line with the 2 per cent annual goal.
Fed officials’ next rate-setting vote is on July 31. Markets expect roughly two quarter-point cuts
this year, with a slightly more than 50 per cent chance of the first being in September — the final
policy decision ahead of the presidential election on November 5.
However, Eswar Prasad, professor at Cornell University, described a move in September as “a lowodds proposition given the gradual pace at which inflation is easing”.
“On current trends, the odds are better for a cut later in the year,” he said.
While inflationary pressures have lessened in recent months, disappointing data at the start of the
year has led the central bank to delay the start of a rate-cutting cycle.
Ryan Sweet, chief US economist at Oxford Economics, said the reading was “encouraging news”
and — while the Fed was not yet “anywhere near ready to declare victory” — the slowdown in the
labour market was becoming a more important factor in its decision-making.

“The Fed’s got to thread a needle where they continue to bring inflation down, but they don’t keep
rates too high for too long and cause stress in the labour market,” Sweet said.
Ajay Rajadhyaksha, global chair of research at Barclays Bank, said that the inflation numbers for
May were encouraging, but it was important to remember it was just one month. Still, he said, “the
one question mark” in his mind was about a potentially sharp slowdown coming in the labour
market.
“Nothing concentrates the mind of a central banker as much as the labour market starting to fall
out of bed,” he said.

Brett Goldstein, senior vice-president of US retirement portfolio management with Franklin
Templeton Investment Solutions, said the data “deserves a muted reaction” given it was in line
with expectations.

“The market’s trying to figure out if there’s going to be a September rate cut. There are off-ramps
along the way to September, and we’ve just driven past an off-ramp,” he said.
US stocks briefly hit intraday record highs during the morning session, but the rally ran out of
steam. The S&P 500 closed 0.4 per cent lower on the day, while the Nasdaq Composite dropped 0.7
per cent.

A rally in government bonds earlier in the session petered out as yields, which move inversely to
price, climbed. The yield on the policy-sensitive two-year Treasury note hit a two-week low
following the release of the data, but reversed course to trade 0.03 percentage points higher at 4.75
per cent on Friday afternoon. The yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury leapt 0.09 percentage
points to a two-week high of 4.38 per cent.
Additional reporting by Martha Muir

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US economy
US inflation
US interest rates
Federal Reserve
Harriet Clarfelt

