FT PROFESSIONAL

Market Questions Markets

Did UK inflation pick up in July?
Market Questions is the FT’s guide to the week ahead

Forecasters say the fall in petrol prices in the US is expected to have led to a rise in consumer spending © FT
montage/Bloomberg/Getty Images

FT reporters
Published AUG 14 2022

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel

Did the rate of UK inflation rise last month?
Surging oil and gas prices, coupled with climbing food costs, are weighing heavily on the UK
economy. In June, inflation in the country hit a fresh 40-year high of 9.4 per cent, above levels in
the eurozone and US.

Inflation data for July will be released on Wednesday, with economists polled by Reuters expecting
the consumer price index to have risen by 9.7 per cent year on year. British households are forecast
to face average annual energy bills above £5,000 next year, as Russia’s war in Ukraine adds to a
squeeze on oil and gas supplies to Europe.
Earlier this month, the Bank of England warned that UK inflation is expected to hit 13 per cent and
the country would fall into recession by the end of the year. The bank raised interest rates by 0.5
percentage points to 1.75 per cent as it attempts to damp demand and stem rising inflation.
Vasileios Gkionakis, head of G10 currency strategy at Citi, said that inflation in the UK is “likely to
prove stickier due to Brexit, complicating further [the] BoE’s policy.”
The US consumer price index rose by 8.5 per cent year-on-year in July, according to figures
released this week, slowing compared with the previous month.
“The US doesn’t have quite as acute an energy issue as the UK,” said Lyn Graham-Taylor, senior
rates strategist at Rabobank, adding that the Bank of England finds itself having “to sacrifice the
economy” by raising interest rates in order to bring surging inflation back down to the 2 per cent
target. Nikou Asgari

What will retail sales tell us about the state of the US consumer?
US retail sales figures for July are expected to give market participants insight into consumer
confidence at the start of the third quarter — an important data point after two quarters of
contraction.
Economists polled by Bloomberg forecast that the Commerce Department will report a 0.2 per cent
increase in overall retail sales in July from the previous month, a slowdown in growth from the 1
per cent increase reported for June.
Some of the difference may be attributable to the decline in petrol prices since June, when the
average cost for a gallon at the pump peaked at over $5. The move between June and July is less
stark when auto and petrol prices are stripped out, though it still shows a slowdown: the
Bloomberg poll indicates expectations of a 0.3 per cent increase in July versus 0.7 per cent in June.

Analysts at Bank of America suggest it is possible that the plunge in gas prices — which was evident
in a slowdown in annual consumer price inflation in July — could have ramped up consumer
spending in other areas of the economy. Those analysts forecast a 0.9 per cent month over month
increase in retail sales, stripped of the effects of spending on cars, petrol, building materials and
restaurants.
The data come in the wake of a red-hot jobs report for July as well as a second consecutive quarter
of contraction in gross domestic product in the April-June period, the combination of which has
provided a somewhat muddled picture of the state of the American consumer.
“Following the second consecutive contraction in real GDP during Q2, the moderation in inflation
and durability of consumption will inform how the third quarter plays out in terms of realised
growth,” said Ian Lyngen, head of US rates strategy at BMO Capital Markets. Kate Duguid

Has the dollar turned?
The US dollar has been on a tear. The Federal Reserve’s aggressive interest rate rises, aimed at
curbing inflation, have helped push the greenback to 20-year highs in recent months. Yet
economists are divided over how much further the currency has to run.
The latest US consumer price index data, which investors were watching closely for clues over how
far the Fed will lift borrowing costs, showed signs of steadying in July. Wall Street stock markets
rallied in response, and the dollar index — which measures the greenback against a basket of six
other currencies — has slipped about 3 per cent lower from its July 14 peak.
“Barring a major upward repricing of rate expectations or revived hard landing fears,” Société
Générale’s Kit Juckes said on Friday, “the dollar has peaked for good, subject as ever to what is
going on elsewhere.”
Others are less sure: over 70 per cent of currency strategists polled by Reuters in early August
thought the dollar’s strength had yet to peak, though a third of those surveyed said it would do so
within the next six months.

ING’s Christopher Turner is among those who reckon the dollar will stay strong to the end of the
year, arguing that it tends to benefit from high rates of inflation, slowing economic growth and
“flat/inverting US yield curves as we have today” — referring to the scenario where yields on
shorter-dated government bonds are higher than those on longer-dated bonds.
“Not until investors become convinced that the Fed is prepared to stimulate, not slow, the US and
global economies should the dollar turn lower,” said Turner. George Steer

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Currencies
Global inflation
Covid-19
Markets
US

