FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Alphaville

On a long enough timeline is all inflation transitory?
The BIS reassures the market that the best cure for high prices is high prices. Nothing to see here.

IZABELLA KAMINSKA

Izabella Kaminska
Published NOV 11 2021

On Wednesday the world learned that the US consumer price index had risen to 6.2 per cent in
October — its fastest annual pace since 1990.
Inflationistas like Steve Hanke were indignant that US inflation was not a transitory supply chain
problem. “Shifts in consumer spending have resulted in broad-based price increases across
expenditure categories” because “the incompetent Fed has produced a massive amount of excess
money,” he proclaimed.
You’d think the news would constitute a fairly disabling blow for “Team Transitory” — those who
believe inflation effects are short-term consequences of pandemic-related supply shocks — in their
ever intensifying battle against the inflationistas on Twitter.
https://twitter.com/pearkes/status/1448276191337713672?s=20
But no. Team Transitory haven’t given up the ghost yet.
What’s more, on Thursday, they had the Bank for International Settlements, by way of their latest
bulletin, coming in with some strategic air cover to revive their case.
It’s called the “bull-whip” effect.

As authors Daniel Rees and Phurichai Rungcharoenkitkul explain, bottlenecks in the supply of
commodities, intermediate goods and freight have led to volatile prices and elongated delivery
days. But then, in trying to mitigate these problems, supply chain participants inadvertently began
building buffers (in already lean networks) exacerbating the problems further.
From the bulletin (our emphasis):

Anticipation of product shortages and precautionary hoarding at different
stages of supply chain have aggravated initial shortages (the “bullwhip
effect”), leading to further incentives to build buffers. These behavioural
changes have the potential to lead to feedback effects that
exacerbate bottlenecks. In this respect, there are parallels
between supply chain disruptions and the liquidity stresses in
financial markets.
A third important background element is the lean structure of supply chains,
which have prioritised efficiency over resilience in recent decades. These
intricate networks of production and logistics were a virtue in
normal times, but have become a shock propagator during the
pandemic. Once dislocations emerged, the complexity of supply chains
made them hard to repair, leading to persistent mismatches between
demand and supply.
What the BIS seems to be saying is that the transitory inflation problem is not dissimilar to a
temporary liquidity shortage in a financial market, which — in the absence of a level-headed
countercyclical entity like a lender of last resort — always stands to snowball into a full-on financial
meltdown through feedback loop effects.
It’s an argument FT Alphaville also made very early on during the pandemic.

To the average hard money fetishist that might sound like an acknowledgment from the BIS that
the economy is at risk from falling into a self-reinforcing feedback loop that spirals into
hyperinflationary overdrive.
But no, what the BIS is saying is this:

. . . persistent bottlenecks could also prompt corrective behavioural changes
over time, eg by providing incentives for investment to expand capacity.
Once bottlenecks begin to ease, the feedback loops could operate
as a virtuous circle to mitigate the bullwhip effects. In this way, just
as bottlenecks have persisted longer than initially expected, their resolution
could also follow more swiftly than currently feared.
So it’s all just a necessary market rebalancing. If we survive the storm, we will eventually arrive at
an idyllically rebalanced point, characterised by plentiful goods and supply harmony. The market
mechanism will deliver us. There is no better cure for high prices than high prices.
Hence they say:

. . . once relative prices have adjusted sufficiently to align supply and
demand, these effects should ease. Some price trends could even go into
reverse as bottlenecks and precautionary hoarding behaviour wane. The
mechanical effect on CPI could well turn disinflationary during this second
phase.
Though they do caveat that this is dependent on the situation not triggering an upward shift in
wage growth or inflation expectations.

The chances of a wage-price spiral are higher if inflationary expectations
become unmoored. Marketand survey-based inflation expectation measures
have increased in recent months alongside tighter bottlenecks, albeit from
very low levels in 2020. It is challenging to identify how much bottlenecks
directly contribute to the recent increase in long-term inflation expectations,
although the pass-through from short-run inflation expectations to its longrun counterpart has increased (see Boissay et al (2021)).
The BIS does not comment on the degree to which vaccine mandates might exacerbate labour
shortages. Nor does it address the obvious point that monetary authorities have little incentive to
discuss their inflationary fears, since addressing the elephant in the room will probably only make
things worse.
In case any of this is not clear, the BIS’s Hyun Song Shin — who noted in July markets were pricing
in a transitory effect — has taken to Twitter to explain it all in the far more digestible medium of
Tweets. You can read his thread here.
What we think would be useful at this point is comparing and contrasting the relative timelines
Team Transitory and Team Inflation are using as their comparative bases. Otherwise, on a long
enough timeline, hasn’t every inflationary period in history been transitory?
Go figure.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Izabella Kaminska
Alphaville
Supply chains

US inflation
Bank for International Settlements

