FT PROFESSIONAL

Federal Reserve

Federal Reserve chief Jay Powell plays down growth worries after jobs report disappoints
Chair says US central bank in no ‘hurry’ to cut interest rates at end of turbulent week for Wall Street

Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell said the world’s largest economy remained ‘in good shape’ despite elevated ‘uncertainty’ ©
Bloomberg

James Politi in Washington, Claire Jones in London and George Steer in New York
Published MAR 7 2025 | Updated MAR 7 2025, 16:03

Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell played down concerns over US growth after U-turns by Donald
Trump’s administration, disappointing jobs numbers and a tumultuous week in financial markets.
Powell on Friday said the world’s largest economy remained “in good shape” despite the elevated
“uncertainty”, after the president launched an aggressive agenda of tariffs and spending cuts.
“We are focused on separating the signal from the noise as the outlook evolves,” Powell said,
adding the Fed was in no “hurry” to cut interest rates and was “well positioned to wait for greater
clarity”.

Powell’s comments came as the blue-chip S&P 500 ended the week down 3.1 per cent, its worst run
since early September. US stocks have pulled back sharply in recent weeks after gloomy economic
reports prompted worries Trump’s tariffs will slow growth.
Corporate executives warned the chaotic pivots in trade policy, including a major reversal this week
on the administration’s plans to tariff goods from Canada and Mexico, had made it difficult to run
their businesses, and could stymie fresh investments into the US.

PLAY | 00:38

Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell said the Fed is not ‘in a hurry’ to cut rates © PBS news
The US is “at a crossroads, economically”, said Charles Lemonides, chief investment officer at
ValueWorks, a New York-based hedge fund. “We don’t know where policy is going and it creates
huge turmoil.”
The Bureau of Labor Statistics on Friday released data showing the US created 151,000 jobs in
February, falling short of the 160,000 forecast by economists polled by Reuters.
The unemployment rate was 4.1 per cent last month, compared with expectations it would hold
steady at 4 per cent.

“Investor sentiment was euphoric after the election but there’s been a whole lot of cold water
thrown on that euphoria over the past month,” said Jim Tierney, head of the concentrated US
growth fund at AllianceBernstein.
“Powell is saying everything is fine, but that’s not what consumer sentiment is saying and it’s not
where we’ve heard business sentiment to be, either,” he added.
The Fed chair had recently signalled the central bank would keep its main interest rate at its
current range of between 4.25 per cent and 4.5 per cent as it assessed the impact of Trump’s
policies.
But markets are increasingly betting the Fed will be forced to cut rates more aggressively this year
than thought, dragging Treasury yields lower and weighing on the dollar.
The US dollar index, which tracks the greenback’s strength against six other currencies, has lost 4.3
per cent this year.
Asked what would prompt the Fed to respond to tariffs imposed on US imports, Powell said on
Friday: “What would really matter is what’s happening with longer-term inflation expectations and
how persistent are the inflationary effects.”
Some economists have warned Trump’s spending cuts and the slashing of the federal workforce
through the so-called “Department of Government Efficiency”, led by billionaire Elon Musk, could
also be a drag on the economy.
Earlier in the week, Trump rolled back some of the tariffs he imposed on Canada and Mexico in an
attempt to soothe markets. On Friday, he acknowledged some economic pain might come from his
policies and their sometimes chaotic rollout.
“There could be some disturbance, a little bit of disturbance,” the president said, repeating a line
from his speech to Congress on Tuesday night. “There will always be changes and adjustments.”

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US trade
US economy
US politics & policy
US interest rates
Federal Reserve

