FT PROFESSIONAL

Federal Reserve

Federal Reserve officials were open to further US rate rises to quell inflation
Hawkish signals from some central bank members came before recent data pointing to cooling price
pressures

Markets are pricing in between one and two interest rate cuts from the Federal Reserve by the end of 2024 © Reuters

Claire Jones in Stresa, Italy
Published MAY 22 2024 | Updated MAY 22 2024, 16:06

Some US Federal Reserve officials signalled they would be prepared to raise interest rates further if
inflation became more aggressive, according to a record of their last meeting at the start of May.
“Various participants mentioned a willingness to tighten policy further should risks to inflation
materialise in a way that such an action became appropriate,” said the minutes of the May 1
Federal Open Market Committee meeting, published on Wednesday.

The prospects of a rate rise have fallen since the vote, after fresh inflation data for the past month
came in cooler than expected. The minutes capture the extent of concerns among central bank
officials at the persistence of inflation in the world’s biggest economy.
The Fed kept interest rates at a 23-year high range of 5.25 per cent to 5.5 per cent at the May 1
meeting — a decision that was unanimously backed by the voting members of the FOMC.
Rate-setters signalled in their post-meeting statement that they would keep borrowing costs higher
for even longer than anticipated following a series of disappointing data readings for January,
February and March, when inflation remained well above the Fed’s 2 per cent target.
“Participants discussed maintaining the current restrictive policy stance for longer should inflation
not show signs of moving sustainably toward 2 per cent or reducing policy restraint in the event of
an unexpected weakening in labour market conditions,” the minutes said.
Markets are pricing in between one and two rate cuts by the end of 2024 and expectations did not
change after publication of the minutes. The S&P 500 closed 0.3 per cent lower, recovering some
ground after slipping as much as 0.7 per cent following the release.
US voters have consistently expressed disapproval with President Joe Biden’s handling of the
economy in recent months, despite a surging stock market and persistently strong labour markets.

Have your say

Biden’s rival in this year’s election to occupy the
White House, Republican Donald Trump, has made
the higher cost of living in recent years part of his
campaign. Higher Fed rates continue to leave
mortgage and other borrowing costs elevated.
However, consumer price index figures for April —

Joe Biden vs Donald Trump: tell us
how the 2024 US election will affect
you

published after the Fed’s rate-setting meeting in May
— showed price pressures were weaker than
anticipated.

The measure that the Fed uses for its 2 per cent inflation target, headline personal consumption
expenditures inflation, is also expected to fall in April. That data is out next Friday.
Additional reporting by Kate Duguid in New York

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US economy
US inflation
US interest rates
Federal Reserve
Claire Jones

