FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Markets Insight

Is the dollar about to take a turn?
If the economy and inflation weaken, the Fed is likely to pause and the US currency will reverse direction

BARRY EICHENGREEN

Current dollar pricing is predicated on the expectation that the Federal Reserve will continue to raise interest rates © Dado
Ruvic/Reuters

Barry Eichengreen
Published JUL 26 2022

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
The writer is professor of economics and political science at the University of California, Berkeley
The dollar has had a spectacular run, having risen more than 10 per cent against other major
currencies since the start of the year.

Actually, not a few governments and central banks would prefer the adjective “disastrous” to
“spectacular”. For developing countries, from Sri Lanka to Argentina, the greenback’s rise has
made servicing dollar-denominated debts, already a difficult task, essentially impossible.
For emerging markets such as Chile that are not heavily saddled with debts, it has raised inflation
by increasing the local-currency equivalent of dollar-denominated food and energy prices. Inflation
and the fall in its currency have forced the Bank of Chile to raise its policy interest rate an
extraordinary nine times in the past year and now to deploy its reserves in support of the peso
exchange rate.
For the European Central Bank, there has been the embarrassment of seeing the euro fall to parity
against the dollar. For the Bank of Japan, there is the fact that the yen has been the worstperforming advanced-country currency on the planet this year.
Why the dollar has strengthened is no mystery. Seeing both high inflation and strong growth, the
Federal Reserve has been raising interest rates faster than other big central banks, drawing capital
flows toward the US.
The ECB, despite having cautiously kicked off its tightening cycle last week, is moving noticeably
more slowly. The curtailment of Russian energy supplies is already weighing on European growth,
and higher interest rates would send a fragile Italian debt market reeling, given the ill-timed rise in
political uncertainty in that country.
The Bank of Japan, meanwhile, has no immediate reason for thinking that the country’s
“lowflation” problem has been solved, and is not inclined to abandon its “yield-control” policy to
keep interest rates down. Neither the BoJ nor the ECB will be matching the Fed by raising policy
rates in 75 or 100 basis-point increments.

US dollar has strengthened considerably this year
Reserve currency against peers, % change
31 December 2021

July 2022

0
-1.7 Canadian dollar
-4.2 Australian dollar

-10 Euro
-10.9 Sterling

-18.8 Japanese yen
Source: Refinitiv

Some will invoke the rise of geopolitical risk from the endless Russia-Ukraine war and the dollar’s
status as a haven. There may be yet more haven flows with tensions around the Taiwan Strait and
Iran. But at the end of the day, recent currency movements have been driven by central banks. The
same will be true going forward.
It is not news, admittedly, that having fallen behind the curve, the Fed is now scrambling to catch
up. Thus, the expectation of further rate rises from Fed chair Jay Powell and others is already in
the market. There is no reason why those additional policy rate increases should move the dollar
any higher, in other words.

But two additional developments complicate the exchange-market outlook. First, other central
banks — the ECB and BoJ notwithstanding — are showing an increasing willingness to match the
Fed in raising rates to address their own spiralling inflation problems. These already include the
central banks of Canada, the Philippines, Singapore, New Zealand and South Korea, among others.
The list is growing.
These countries’ finances are sufficiently strong to withstand interest rate rises, and inflation is a
matter of common concern. Their central banks are therefore at least keeping pace with the Fed.
The dollar has consequently shown less strength against a broad basket including the currencies of
these countries. The same is apt to be true in the weeks and months ahead.
Second, and more ominously, there is recession risk in the US. Current dollar pricing is predicated,
to repeat, on the expectation that the Fed will continue to raise rates. That expectation is based in
turn on the hopeful assumption that the US economy will continue to expand.
If the Fed-engineered slowdown spreads from the housing market to retail sales and business
investment, the combined effect will drag down not just US spending but also inflation.
The idea that, in these recessionary circumstances, inflation will remain in the high single digits
and the Fed will therefore be forced to continue its tightening cycle, is quite daft.
As Fed chair, Paul Volcker kept raising rates in the face of a recession — and the dollar kept soaring
— because inflation remained stubbornly high for several years. There is little sign of similar
inflation inertia today.
So if the economy and inflation weaken, the Fed will pause, and the dollar will reverse direction.
This is no longer a risk that can be dismissed.
Letter in response to this article:
China isn’t to blame for debt woes of BRI nations / From Khairy Tourk, Professor of Economics,
Stuart School of Business, Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, IL, US

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Barry Eichengreen
Markets Insight
US inflation
US interest rates
US dollar

