FT PROFESSIONAL

Unhedged Markets

Humble Jay gets it right
Higher for longer is the right balance, for now

© Bloomberg

Robert Armstrong and Ethan Wu
Published SEP 21 2023

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
This article is an on-site version of our Unhedged newsletter. Sign up here to get the newsletter
sent straight to your inbox every weekday

Good morning. We said in yesterday’s intro that Instacart’s IPO price was too low. Just kidding.
The stock fell back to its offer price yesterday, 11 per cent down from the day before. Arm, another
recent debut, fell too. Are we seeing the IPO comeback fizzle? Email us: robert.armstrong@ft.com
and ethan.wu@ft.com.

An appropriately humble Fed
Jay Powell’s dislike of the summary of economic projections becomes clearer with each Fed press
conference. The SEP reports, at every other Fed meeting, the estimates of the 19 members of the
Fed’s Open Market Committee for growth, employment, inflation and interest rates, over the
remainder of the current year and for the three years to come. It is not a basis for policy; it’s just a
survey. The members’ degree of confidence in their estimates is not recorded, but it is surely very
low. Its quantitative crispness, as personified by the infamous “dot plot” of rate policy expectations,
is therefore an illusion. And the poor chair has to answer question after question about it. “We’ll
watch the data,” he says, with perceptibly rising ennui.
Yet the SEP tells us things, whether the chair likes it or not. When it changes a lot, it shows that
events have forced a group of influential people, whose job it is to think hard about the economy, to
change their minds.
And on a day the Fed opted not to change rates at all, the SEP changed a lot, and in interesting
ways. Here is the summary table:

Start with the economic view. Since June, growth expectations have risen notably for this year and
next; expectations for unemployment have fallen notably; and expectations for inflation are all but
unchanged. Six months ago, this combination would have seemed close to insane. Steady growth,
extremely low unemployment, and inflation half a per cent from target? You wish, our past selves
would have howled. And yet here we are. The economy, or at least big parts of it, have reaccelerated, as exemplified by the pick-up in consumer spending this summer. At the same time,
core inflation has continued to trend down, even if slowly, and unemployment has risen marginally
at most. Powell has long said the path to a soft landing is narrow, but it sure looks like we are
walking it.

This makes the policy bit of the SEP all the more striking (that’s the bottom two rows of the table
above). The committee’s aggregate expectation is for the policy rate to be 5.1 per cent at the end of
next year, less than two quarter-point cuts below the current level. The market is not ready for this:
futures imply a 4.7 per cent expectation in December 2024; a week ago, the expectation was 4.4 per
cent. Absorbing these numbers, and Powell’s tone at yesterday’s press conference, stocks drifted
down and short-term Treasury yields rose. Several reporters gave voice to the market’s agita,
asking Powell if he wasn’t worried that, with inflation falling, holding nominal rates higher for
longer didn’t risk an increase in real rates that would harm the economy unnecessarily.
A fair question, but we should all bear in mind the critical lesson of the past three years: we don’t
understand very much about inflation. Those who looked prescient in predicting how high inflation
would rise in 2021 and 2022 — mostly economists focused on excess demand — almost universally
failed to predict the rapid decline in inflation, accompanied by economic strength, that we have
seen in the past 12 months. Economists whose theoretical apparatus explains the last year nicely —
mostly those focused on the coronavirus pandemic supply shock — look wise now, but were almost
universally wrong about how bad inflation would get in the first place. An observer who is not a
partisan of either camp could be forgiven for concluding that we don’t know what is going to
happen next.
A similarly careful view of how higher rates affect the economy makes sense, too. The fast rise in
the policy rates seems to have affected different sectors of the economy very unevenly this time
around. It has crippled commercial real estate, frozen (but not cracked) the housing market, and
thrown banks for a loop. But big swaths of the economy, starting with the consumer, seem not to
have noticed, even in the face of poor sentiment. That’s why we don’t even know if we are at the
very beginning of an economic cycle or the very end.
Today’s economic vim may not last. Powell nodded yesterday to a litany of coming headwinds: the
autoworker strike, $90 oil, resumed student loan payments, a potential government shutdown,
new highs in long yields. But equally, the US consumer has powered through worse, and real wages
are on the rise again. What will the net effect be? A proper growth deterioration is plausible, but so
is the shortlived fourth-quarter GDP “pothole” that Goldman Sachs expects.

Given the indeterminacy, the committee is right to plan — provisionally — to keep rates higher for
longer. The risk of causing a recession and the risk of allowing inflation to recur are both live, but
for now punchy growth makes the latter outcome look more dangerous. But if the data changes, the
Fed can, too. (Armstrong & Wu)

One good read
No one does media intrigue like Michael Wolff.

FT Unhedged podcast
Can’t get enough of Unhedged? Listen to our
new podcast, hosted by Ethan Wu and Katie
Martin, for a 15-minute dive into the latest
markets news and financial headlines, twice a
week. Catch up on past editions of the
newsletter here.

Recommended newsletters for you
Swamp Notes — Expert insight on the intersection of money and power in US politics. Sign up
here
The Lex Newsletter — Lex is the FT’s incisive daily column on investment. Sign up for our
newsletter on local and global trends from expert writers in four great financial centres. Sign up
here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
US economy
US inflation
US interest rates
Markets

