FT PROFESSIONAL

FirstFT World

FirstFT: Powell warns Fed is prepared to return to bigger rate rises
Also in today’s newsletter: VW prioritises US plant over Europe, and it’s International Women’s Day

Fed chair Jay Powell’s testimony marks the first public remarks since data releases showed the central bank was still struggling to
cool the US economy © Andrew Harnik/AP

Amy Bell
Published MAR 7 2023 | Updated MAR 8 2023, 06:21

Good morning. This article is an on-site version of our FirstFT newsletter. Sign up to our Asia,
Europe/Africa or Americas edition to get it sent straight to your inbox every weekday morning

Good morning.
Jay Powell warned that the US Federal Reserve was prepared to return to bigger interest rate rises
to fight inflation, when he spoke at yesterday’s congressional appearance.

In an FT scoop, Volkswagen is prioritising a battery plant in North America over Europe as it seeks
€10bn from the US.
And Happy International Women’s Day. We have a webinar on four things women need to know
about love and money, which you can join for free here, and a special report on Women in
Business.
Today I’m keeping tabs on:

US Federal Reserve: Central bank’s Beige Book on economic conditions
to be released.
Vote on crime: A vote on Washington DC’s criminal code is being billed
as a litmus test of President Joe Biden’s commitment to law and order.
International Women’s Day: European Central Bank president
Christine Lagarde and World Trade Organization chief Ngozi OkonjoIweala mark the occasion with a dialogue about the role of women in the
economy.
Thank you for reading FirstFT. We’d love to hear from you at firstft@ft.com.

Today’s top news
1. The US Federal Reserve is prepared to return to bigger interest rate rises to fight
inflation, chair Jay Powell warned the Senate banking committee yesterday, ahead of the release of
the central bank’s Beige Book today. Powell’s remarks prompted a stock market sell-off.
2. EXCLUSIVE: Volkswagen is prioritising a battery plant in the US over Europe after
estimating it could receive €10bn in American incentives. Read more on the latest fallout from Joe
Biden’s $369bn green subsidies package.
3. EXCLUSIVE: The EU has told Elon Musk to hire more staff to moderate Twitter.
Regulators are concerned about the billionaire’s plan to use volunteers and artificial intelligence to
monitor content.

Related: Musk has said Twitter could return to positive cash flow next
quarter, but admitted there was a “massive decline in advertising”.
4. A bipartisan bill paves the way for the US to ban Chinese apps that pose security
threats, including the popular video-sharing app TikTok.

Related: Can TikTok convince the world it is not a tool for China?
5. Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskyy has doubled down on defending
Bakhmut despite earlier signals of a withdrawal from the eastern city that is almost surrounded
by Russian troops.

The Big Read

Torrents of water have broken through the main road linking villages in Pakistan’s Dadu district, further isolating communities and
restricting movement between areas devastated by last year’s floods © Asim Hafeez/FT

As it rebuilds from devastating floods, Pakistan will be a test case for an issue of growing global
importance: how vulnerable countries, many of which have contributed little to global greenhouse
gas emissions, recover from the havoc wreaked by increasingly frequent and extreme weather
events — and how much polluting rich nations should help them.

We’re also reading . . .
Tangled ties: Last month’s earthquake has exposed the UN’s links with
the Syrian regime, including an aid agency that hired the daughter of the
country’s spy chief.
US banking: For most overseas lenders, US retail banking has been a
graveyard of broken dreams, writes Brooke Masters. So why do they keep
trying?
Indonesia IPOs: Nickel companies are driving a record year for public
listings in the south-east Asian country, which has ambitions to become a
top participant in the global electric-car market.

Chart of the day
Corporate America’s gender pay gap has hardly improved in two decades, according to research by
Pew, as cultural and societal barriers continue to frustrate efforts to make diversity stick in whitecollar fields. US women typically earn 82 cents for every dollar earned by men.

Gender pay gaps in the US have shown little improvement in two decades
Women's-to-men's earnings ratio, by race and Hispanic ethnicity, for wage and salary workers who
usually worked full time (%)
95

Black
Black

90

Hispan
Hispani

85

Total
Total
White
White

80

Asian
Asian

75

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

2014

2016

2018

2020

2022

Source: US Bureau of Labor Statistic

Take a break from the news
The Nairobi Polo Club may not have the luxury brand sponsorships enjoyed by the likes of
Florida’s Palm Beach or England’s Cowdray Park, but homegrown talents are leading a surge in
popularity, driven by chair Raphael Nzomo’s efforts to make the sport more accessible and
inclusive:

Always when you read about polo, it talks about polo being the game of kings
and princes and knights and I am none of that. I’m just a hardworking
adrenaline freak who was intrigued by the sport and was not daunted

© Eduardo Soteras Jalil/Financial Times

Additional contributions by Tee Zhuo and Emily Goldberg

Recommended newsletters for you
Asset Management — Find out the inside story of the movers and shakers behind a
multitrillion-dollar industry. Sign up here
The Week Ahead — Start every week with a preview of what’s on the agenda. Sign up here

Thank you for reading and remember you can add FirstFT to myFT. You can also elect to receive
a FirstFT push notification every morning on the app. Send your recommendations and
feedback to firstft@ft.com

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
World
Companies
FirstFT
Amy Bell

