FT PROFESSIONAL

Yield curve

Bond market points to Fed standing firm in battle against inflation
US yield curve is at its most inverted since 1981 in sign investors see recession on horizon

Shifts in the bond market show investors moving more in alignment with what the Federal Reserve has said it expects for the coming
year © Samuel Corum/Bloomberg

Kate Duguid in New York
Published DEC 8 2022

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
The gulf between short- and long-term US borrowing costs has reached its widest point since 1981,
in a sign investors expect the Federal Reserve to stay the course in its battle to tame inflation, even
as recession worries mount.
The two-year Treasury yield traded on Wednesday at 4.2 per cent, while the 10-year yield stood at
3.4 per cent, bringing the difference between the two to 0.84 percentage points. The pattern,
known as a yield curve “inversion”, has preceded every US economic downturn of the past 50 years.

The deepening of the inversion comes after a report last week showing the US economy continued
adding jobs at a robust pace in November and an important survey indicating activity in the vast
services sector is continuing to grow rapidly.
While the data paint an upbeat picture of the state of the economy, some investors are worried that
it will also encourage the Fed to keep pushing interest rates higher next year, after taking them
from near zero to a range of 3.75 to 4 per cent so far in 2022. Higher borrowing costs, in turn, are
expected to heap pressure on the economy and potentially trigger a recession.
“The market had been betting that the Fed would be forced to slow down. The past year has taught
us that the market has been wrong over and over again on this assumption,” said Edward AlHussainy, a senior analyst at Columbia Threadneedle.
Shifts in the US bond market also show investors moving more in alignment with what the Fed has
said it expects for the coming year. Though the yield curve has been flattening all year, it bounced
off of lows in late November and investors last week began pricing in two interest rate cuts by the
end of 2023, both indicating a loosening in monetary policy.
This gap between the Fed and the market was especially evident after a speech by chair Jay Powell
last week in which he signalled that although the US central bank would slow its pace of rate
increases at its December meeting, it would do so to allow rates to remain higher for longer.
Markets focused on the first piece and not the second.
After the release on Friday of the US jobs report, however, the steepening move in the yield curve
unravelled, though rate cuts next year are still priced in. Futures markets currently suggest the
“terminal” federal funds rate, or the peak in this cycle, will be about 5 per cent in May, from
expectations of as low as 4 per cent in September.
“The [November] payrolls report reminded us that the job market remains in a very good place,
and we’re expecting to see that reflected in a higher terminal rate in the dots,” said Ben Jeffery, a
US rates strategist at BMO Capital Markets, referring to the Fed’s quarterly poll of officials on
where the economy and monetary policy will be in the years ahead — also known as the “dot
plot”. The next dot plot will be released at the Fed’s December meeting.

US bond market flashes warning sign
Gap in two and 10-year Treasury yields (percentage points)

3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5

The most basic signal sent by the yield curve inversion is that investors believe the Fed’s increases
in short-term rates will be successful in sharply slowing inflation. The magnitude of this inversion
then reflects both the dramatic pace of rate increases, and the fact that the Fed has stuck with that
pace even as investors have shifted their expectations on inflation and growth.
“We think the shape of the yield curve is a measure of the extent to which monetary policy can
tighten, and the market clearly thinks that tightness is going to persist for quite some time,” said
Mark Cabana, head of US rates strategy at Bank of America.
Jonathan Cohn at Credit Suisse added that the deepening yield curve inversion suggests investors
believe the Fed is committed to “inflation moderation even if it must sacrifice forward-looking
growth or recession”.

In a December survey conducted by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago
Booth School of Business in partnership with the Financial Times, 85 per cent of economists said
they expected the National Bureau of Economic Research — the arbiter of recession in the US —
will declare one by next year.
Though the yield curve has been a reliable indicator of recession, the information conveyed by the
depth and extent of the inversion is up for debate.
“The inverted yield curve is actually a pretty good signal of recession, without providing
information as to its depth or severity,” said Guy LeBas, chief fixed-income strategist at Janney
Montgomery Scott.
“In this case, the inversion is probably telling us more about inflation and the direction of inflation
risks than the depths or severity of a recession.”
While strategists such as LeBas argue that the degree of the yield curve inversion may not directly
predict the extent of the coming recession, the current deepening could have broader ramifications
if it leads to changes in investor behaviour.
“The more important aspect of the yield curve is what it does to risk-taking,” said Gregory Peters,
co-chief investment officer for fixed income at PGIM. “It’s a self-reinforcing mechanism.”

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
US Treasury bonds
US economy
Yield curve
US interest rates

