FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion The FT View

The long shadows of America’s growing debt
A failure to acknowledge the US debt problem puts growth and stability on the line

THE EDITORIAL BOARD

The US Treasury building in Washington. Both political parties support fiscal responsibility in theory, but neither is prepared to
tighten belts © Stefani Reynolds/AFP/Getty Images

The editorial board
Published MAY 7 2024

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel

In March, Phillip Swagel, director of the US Congress’s independent fiscal watchdog, told the
Financial Times that America risked a Liz Truss-style market shock with its soaring debt pile. His
reference to the former British prime minister’s “mini” Budget in September 2022 — which led to a
sudden surge in UK government bond yields and ructions across financial markets — was an
attempt to fend off complacency, rather than a warning of imminent implosion.
Swagel is right to sound the alarm. America’s debt is on an unsustainable path. The Congressional
Budget Office projects America’s debt-to-GDP ratio will surpass its second world war high of 106
per cent by the end of the decade, and keep rising. The total deficit is forecast to average 5.5 per
cent of GDP until 2030 — about 2 percentage points higher than the post-1940 mean. Net interest
payments, which are currently around 3 per cent of GDP, are expected to keep creeping upward
too.
Politics is an aggravating factor. Both the Democrats and Republicans heed the importance of fiscal
responsibility in theory, but neither is prepared to tighten belts, particularly in an election year. Joe
Biden proposed a $7.3tn budget plan for 2025. His presidential rival, Donald Trump, has vowed to
renew tax cuts enacted during his time in the White House, which could add another $5tn to the
nation’s debt, according to the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, a think-tank.
America’s growing debt puts upward pressure on its longer-term borrowing costs. Lax fiscal policy
can raise inflation expectations and the perceived risk of holding debt for long periods. The hefty
pipeline of debt issuance will also need to be absorbed by more price-sensitive investors, with the
Fed now engaging in quantitative tightening.

Elevated yields raise the cost of borrowing and could undermine economic growth. There is an
increased vulnerability to rapid and disruptive movements in US bond markets. This has knock-on
effects for credit and financial stability abroad too, since US Treasuries act as a benchmark for
pricing debt globally. IMF research suggests that a 1 percentage point spike in US rates led to a 90
basis point rise in other advanced economies’ bond yields, and an increase in emerging markets of
1 percentage point. Restraints on domestic and global growth will only heighten the debt reduction
challenge.
America’s economic heft gives it substantial leeway. The dollar’s role as the international reserve
currency means demand for US debt is ever-present, and AI-driven productivity growth could
indeed help lessen its debt problems. But the country’s global influence may foster a dangerous
complacency among its politicians. Ignoring the difficult tax and spending decisions needed to put
debt on a more sustainable footing keeps the economy on a risky path amid political and economic
uncertainty.

For instance, another Trump presidency would come with significant unknowns. Reports that his
team is drawing up proposals to water down the Fed’s independence are deeply worrying for
inflation control. A well-behaved bond market hinges on clarity and confidence in government
policy — as Truss could attest. Rising geopolitical instability and risks in financial markets, from
private capital to liquidity problems in Treasury markets, are also exposures. Shocks could damp
growth and drive harmful spikes in yields, making debt dynamics even worse.
Sooner or later policymakers need to engage in bipartisan efforts to think seriously about how
America funds itself responsibly. If not, panicked bond traders may force them to. As the IMF chief
economist, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, said last month: “Something will have to give.”

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
The editorial board
The FT View
Sovereign bonds
Global Economy
UK financial crisis

