FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Serious Money

Will young investors hang on for the ride?
Markets take a turn for the worse as inflationary pressures weigh on our personal
finances

CLAER BARRETT

© FT montage: Jacob Ammentorp Lund/Getty, Alex Kraus/Bloomberg

Claer Barrett
Published JAN 28 2022

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
We’ve picked up plenty of habits during the pandemic — streaming endless box sets, working from
home in leisure wear, and emailing colleagues asking if it’s OK to ring them (the shattering
intrusion of a phone call being more than some people can bear).

As restrictions end, change is definitely in the air.
In the past week or so, global stock markets — and tech stocks in particular — have been volatile.
Blame inflation, which is surging at its fastest rate in 30 years, the expectation of further global
interest rate rises to contain it, and the withdrawal of asset-boosting monetary stimulus.
It’s symbolic that Netflix and Peloton, which powered ahead during the pandemic, have been the
early casualties of the current earnings season.
Our habits are changing. The cost of living is shooting up. This is affecting our personal finances, as
well as the corporate earnings of companies we invest in.
At home, we’re already contending with rising energy bills and higher food prices; next, we’ll have
higher taxes and rising interest rates. This is particularly worrisome for young property owners
with huge amounts of mortgage debt. Chances are that surging inflation has promoted an older
doom-monger in your life to harp on about the double-digit interest rates they were hit with in the
late 1970s and early 1990s.
To top it all off, bosses are summoning workers back to the office, with all of the extra costs that
entails.
Considering the millions of younger people who started investing during the pandemic, I have been
wondering if this is a habit they’ll stick with. Will they be spooked by market volatility as the “spare
money” millions had to invest during the pandemic starts flowing back towards Pret A Manger?
Early signs from the US suggest smaller investors are holding their nerve — for now. Research
from data provider VandaTrack shows retail investors are still pumping cash into US equities even
as share prices tumble from historic highs.
However, shares in US retail brokerage Robinhood have been hit as the meme stock trading frenzy
loses steam.

Previous market wobbles have been an opportunity to profit, as gung-ho investors “buy the dip”
and hang for the inevitable bounce. But the most experienced investors doubt this pattern will
continue, predicting markets are heading for a fundamental shift that could unsettle recent
entrants.
Danni Hewson, a financial analyst at AJ Bell, notes how “lockdown investors” have enjoyed a
period of incredible growth — particularly when it comes to US tech stocks, and of course the
volatile world of cryptocurrencies (another trend that’s now rapidly unravelling).
“The shift from growth to value stocks that so many traditional investors are making won’t appeal
in the same way,” she says. “Who wants to invest in mayo when you could be putting your dosh
into shiny Teslas with their maverick boss?”
Many older investors are now chasing dividends, but Hewson notes younger investors have always
been fixated on share price growth: “Watching the numbers fly up can be addictive, but what
happens to the enjoyment of the game now that it has changed?”
It’s a valid question — and assuming markets get choppier, I wonder if young investors will panic
and take their money out, or adjust their portfolios and stick along for the ride.
In the rush to get invested, driven by the fear of missing out, not many thought about their longterm strategy. But I don’t see this as a huge problem. The biggest barrier has been overcome —
they’ve got started. You might make mistakes as an investor — we all do — but assuming these
don’t put you off the stock market for life, there’s a lot to be said for learning by doing.
However, the “get rich slowly” mindset of the value investor is vastly different from the “get rich
quick” drama of chasing overnight gains in GameStop and AMC. Hewson worries that some
newbies might lose interest in a longer term strategy before money can be made.
I am about to offer them some boring and sensible advice, but the older I get, the more I realise
that “boring and sensible” is a wonderfully reassuring strategy that usually pays off in the long run.
First, think about the fundamentals. Everyone needs a cash emergency fund so they’re not forced
into selling investments when markets are down and they need the money.

Be prepared to lock away money that’s invested for

Don’t feel you have to stop
trading in single shares, but
limit your exposure to a smaller
percentage of your pot
Claer Barrett

the long term — at least five to 10 years. This is
psychologically difficult if you’re checking
investment apps every hour of the day. I’ve got mine
on my tablet, not my phone, so I’m tempted to check
them less often.
Having cut down your screen time, start learning

more about investment (growth versus value is a good place to start). Explore the themes that
excite you, researching funds and investment trusts that could give you exposure to these areas of
the market (for example, I’m particularly interested in small-caps at the moment). Use these to
create a more diversified portfolio, perhaps using cheaper passive funds as building blocks.
Don’t feel you have to stop trading in single shares, but limit your exposure to a smaller percentage
of your pot. Follow the advice of the Naked Trader: before he buys a share, he considers what his
likely exit plan will be, and sets up a “stop loss” to limit the potential downside.
Consider writing down your long-term goals to provide reassurance in times of market turbulence.
I’ve got a notebook I use for keeping track of my investments (old school, I know). In it is written:
“I do not want to withdraw any money from my Isa until I’m over 60” along with a chart showing
how the funds inside could grow at my current rate of saving, which I made using an online
compound interest calculator. I’ve met other investors who create vision boards for the same
reason. Patience pays!
Don’t try to time the market. I have long been a fan of regular savings plans, where you invest a set
amount into your Isa every month, which is automatically allocated to funds, trust or shares of
your choice. These start from £25 per month.
If my investments take a turn for the worse, I also like to think about what I might have spent the
money on if I hadn’t invested it — in my case, clothes, shoes and handbags. My experiences of
selling surplus items on Facebook Marketplace has shown me you’re certain to book a far bigger
loss on these than you probably ever will on your investments!

There are no short-cuts to wealth, but nailing these investment habits when you’re young will
hopefully pay dividends in the future.
Claer Barrett is the FT’s consumer editor: claer.barrett@ft.com; Twitter @Claerb;
Instagram @Claerb

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Claer Barrett
Serious Money
Retail investing
Investing in funds
Investments

