FT PROFESSIONAL

US economy

Fed’s Mary Daly says case for half-point rate rise in May has grown
Signs suggest US central bank is preparing aggressive moves to bring persistent inflation under control

Mary Daly says data show the labour market is ‘tight to an unsustainable level’ © Mark Green/FT

Colby Smith in Washington
Published APR 3 2022

The case for a half-point interest rate increase at the Federal Reserve’s next policy meeting in May
has grown, according to Mary Daly, president of the US central bank’s San Francisco branch, in the
latest sign that it is readying aggressive moves to root out high inflation.
Daly joins an expanding group of Fed officials who have jettisoned a gradual approach to scaling
back support for the economy in the aftermath of the pandemic-induced recession, embracing a
more rapid withdrawal as the labour market has bounded back and price pressures have become
far-reaching.

Support has coalesced in recent weeks for interest rates to rise to a “neutral” level that neither aids
nor constrains growth, and to get there more quickly than initially expected by moving in larger
increments than the quarter-point rate increase delivered in March.
That would entail resurrecting a tool last used more than two decades ago and raising rates by half
a percentage point at one or more meetings this year.
“The case for 50, barring any negative surprise between now and the next meeting, has grown,”
said Daly in an interview with the Financial Times on Friday. “I’m more confident that taking these
early adjustments would be appropriate.”
Estimating the neutral policy rate to be between 2.3 per cent and 2.5 per cent, and advocating for
getting to that level “efficiently” this year, Daly acknowledged that would translate in to “multiple”
half-point adjustments given the target range of between 0.25 per cent and 0.50 per cent.
Following signals from some of the most senior policymakers on the Federal Open Market
Committee in recent weeks — including Jay Powell, the chair — Wall Street economists have raised
their forecasts for interest rates. They now expect the central bank to follow through with halfpoint moves in May and June before downshifting to quarter-point rate rises for the four
remaining meetings after that.
Citigroup thinks the Fed could even go so far as to deliver half-point increases at its next four
meetings, taking their cue from several officials who have endorsed moving rates above neutral this
year. Most economists expect the Fed to begin shrinking its $9tn balance sheet next month.
Daly’s comments followed the release of another strong jobs report that showed 431,000 positions
were added in March and the unemployment rate dropped to the lowest level since before the
pandemic, at 3.6 per cent.
Daly said the latest data fortified the view that the labour market was “very strong” and “tight to an
unsustainable level”.

“If you want a job in the United States, you can get one and you can probably get multiple jobs at
this point,” she said. “If you’re an employer looking for workers, it’s hard to both hire them and
retain them.”
While the combination of a labour market that has no “slack” and inflation that is running at the
fastest pace in 40 years justified moving towards neutral, Daly said the Fed would proceed
carefully enough to avoid an “unforced error” that destabilised financial markets or the broader
economy.
Fed officials appear confident in their ability to damp demand and tame inflation without causing
widespread job losses or a recession. Powell spoke optimistically about achieving a soft landing at
his most recent public appearance last month.
Daly acknowledged that the economy may need to slow considerably in order to bring inflation
back in line with the central bank’s 2 per cent target. But she drew a distinction to the 1970s, when
then-chair Paul Volcker’s efforts to control surging prices and tether inflation expectations caused
a sharp economic contraction.
“Our job really is to just bring demand and supply back into balance, and that’s an easier job than
trying to reset the inflation anchor to something more consistent with price stability,” she said.
“I’m very optimistic that we can avoid a hard landing.”

Swamp Notes
Rana Foroohar and Edward Luce discuss the biggest themes at the intersection of money and
power in US politics every Monday and Friday. Sign up for the newsletter here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article

Global inflation
US economy
US inflation
US interest rates
Federal Reserve

