FT PROFESSIONAL

Markets Briefing Markets

Treasury yields edge lower despite US inflation higher than expected
Stocks rise in subdued reaction to consumer price data

© FT montage/AP

Harriet Clarfelt and Jaren Kerr in New York and Daria Mosolova in London and
Published SEP 13 2023 | Updated SEP 13 2023, 16:24

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
US stocks advanced and Treasury yields fell on Wednesday as investors shrugged off a higher than
expected inflation report.

The benchmark S&P 500 equity index manage to carve out a 0.1 per cent gain by the closing bell in
New York, after having dipped into negative territory. Traditionally defensive sectors such as
utilities, consumer staples and healthcare were among the best-performing segments. The
technology-focused Nasdaq Composite gained 0.3 per cent.
New data showed US consumer prices climbed at an annual rate of 3.7 per cent in August, up from
3.2 per cent in the previous month and marginally above analysts’ forecasts. Core inflation fell
from 4.7 per cent to 4.3 per cent over the same period, in line with expectations, but surprised to
the upside on a monthly basis, adding 0.3 per cent compared to July.
Traders initially sold short-term US debt, but had piled back in by the afternoon session. The yield
on interest rate-sensitive two-year US Treasuries fell 0.03 percentage points to 4.98 per cent. Bond
yields fall when prices rise.
An increase in the headline figure was expected as oil prices have climbed since June after oil
exporters Saudi Arabia and Russia announced supply cuts in an effort to prop up prices.
“The main impact on the headline inflation rate comes from rising energy prices but the Fed is
likely to look through this given core inflation remains subdued,” said Richard Garland, chief
investment strategist at Omnis Investments.
Some parts of core inflation are hard for the Federal Reserve to knock down, Simplify Asset
Management chief strategist Michael Green said. He pointed to components such as motor
insurance, which is up 19 per cent on an annual basis owing to the higher prices paid for new
vehicles in recent years.
“The Fed is in a very difficult position where factors outside of their control are now the primary
drivers” of inflation, Green said.
Despite the uptick in headline inflation, traders still expect the Fed to keep interest rates steady at
its policy meeting next week.

“The combination of slower core inflation, slower job growth, and an uptick in the unemployment
rate in August will almost certainly be enough for the Fed to hold interest rates unchanged,” wrote
Bill Adams, chief economist for Comerica Bank.

International benchmark Brent crude reversed early gains to settle 0.2 per cent lower at $91.88 a
barrel on Wednesday, having hit a 10-month high earlier in the day. The US equivalent West Texas
Intermediate fell 0.4 per cent to $88.52.
Recent pressure on prices, however, has prompted traders to tip their bets in favour of another rate
increase by the European Central Bank, which is due to announce its policy decision on Thursday.
Swaps markets are now placing a 63 per cent probability that the central bank will increase
eurozone interest rates by 0.25 percentage points to 4 per cent this week.
Yields on the policy-sensitive two-year German Bunds, a regional benchmark in Europe, rose 0.04
percentage points to 3.16 per cent on Wednesday.

If “the ECB does decide to hike tomorrow, they are more likely to indicate a willingness to pause
thereafter, keeping the impact on the terminal rate fairly limited”, said Jason Davis, global rates
portfolio manager at JPMorgan Asset Management.
Europe’s region-wide Stoxx 600 ended the day 0.3 per cent lower, extending losses from the
previous session, while France’s CAC 40 and Germany’s Dax fell 0.4 per cent.
Asian markets edged lower on Wednesday, with China’s benchmark CSI 300 down 0.6 per cent
while Hong Kong’s Hang Seng and Japan’s Topix each gave up 0.1 per cent.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Bonds
Commodities
Equities
Markets
Markets Briefing

