FT PROFESSIONAL

FT-Booth Survey US economy

Economists predict US interest rate rise in 2022
FT-IGM survey suggests increase will come more quickly than Fed’s latest projections

More than 80% of economists surveyed expect Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell to be renominated © Financial Times

Colby Smith and Christine Zhang in New York
Published SEP 10 2021

The Federal Reserve will have to wind down its pandemic-era stimulus programme quickly and
raise US interest rates in 2022 in response to higher inflation, according to a poll of leading
academic economists for the Financial Times.
The latest survey conducted in partnership with the FT by the Initiative on Global Markets at the
University of Chicago Booth School of Business suggests a much more aggressive approach to
tightening monetary policy than the Fed’s most recent projections and market expectations
indicate.

Just over 70 per cent of respondents believe the Fed will raise rates by at least a quarter of a
percentage point in 2022, with almost 20 per cent expecting the move to come in the first six
months of the year. That is far earlier than the 2023 lift-off from today’s near-zero levels that Fed
officials pencilled in back in June.
To be in a position to raise rates in 2022, most of the 49 economists polled in the FT-IGM US
Macroeconomists Survey expect the Fed to soon reveal its plans to begin reducing or “tapering” its
programme of $120bn a month in bond purchases and complete the process by next year.

The US central bank has committed to the current pace of purchases until it sees “substantial
further progress” towards average 2 per cent inflation and maximum employment. The first goal
has already been met, officials have said, with room for improvement on the second.

More than 40 per cent of the economists believe the Fed will announce tapering at its meeting in
November, with 31 per cent expecting it in December. The timeline may slip if coronavirus
infections spread further and hiring stalls, many economists warned — a quarter anticipated no
announcement until next year.
The survey results, collected between September 3 and September 8, match up closely with the
views put forward by more “hawkish” members of the Fed’s policy-setting Federal Open Market
Committee, who worry about soaring consumer prices and contend that the US economy can
withstand less support.
“In 2022, there will be a sufficiently strong labour market with sufficiently strong wage growth and
sufficient concerns about not wanting inflation to stay above 2 per cent for long,” said survey
participant Stephen Cecchetti, an economist at Brandeis University, who previously led the
monetary and economic department at the Bank for International Settlements.
Roaring demand from consumers flush with pent-up savings alongside severe supply bottlenecks
and other shortages have pushed inflation to its highest pace in 13 years and rekindled concerns
that price pressures will persist.

The economists, who cited further supply disruptions as a top hazard, raised their median year-end
forecast for the Fed’s preferred inflation measurement — core personal consumption expenditures,
or PCE — to 3.7 per cent, up from 3 per cent in June. Almost 70 per cent also said it was
“somewhat” or “very” likely this gauge would still exceed 2 per cent on a year-over-year basis by the
end of 2022.
According to the economists, the inflation rate may be high enough to compel the Fed to shortchange its goal of maximum employment and instead raise interest rates before the US labour
market has fully healed.
The unemployment rate is expected to stay stubbornly high this year, with economists’ median
estimate at 4.9 per cent for December. As of last month it hovered at 5.2 per cent. That pace of job
gains means the unemployment rate would not fall back to its pre-pandemic level of 3.5 per cent
until 2023, 43 per cent of the respondents said, while 23 per cent assumed it could take until 2024
or later.

“They will make a macro error [and] raise rates too soon,” said panellist Danny Blanchflower, an
economist at Dartmouth University and a former member of the Bank of England’s Monetary
Policy Committee. He added that the unemployment rate could fall as low as 2.5 per cent before
contributing to inflation, warning that the risk that the labour market sputters was “hugely higher”
than the prospect that employment improves quickly.

Another risk, according to Nicholas Bloom of Stanford University, is a repeat of the destabilising
2013 “taper tantrum” that occurred when the Fed signalled it would withdraw stimulus sooner
than expected. That view is not shared by the majority of the economists, however, with few
anticipating a significant sell-off in US equities or Treasuries over the next six months.
Menzie Chinn of the University of Wisconsin-Madison, who forecast the Fed to end its asset
purchases in the first half of 2022 and raise interest rates later that year, attributed the more
muted market reaction to the central bank’s success in clearly communicating its policy plans.

One lingering point of uncertainty is chair Jay Powell’s fate at the Fed, given his term expires early
next year. More than 80 per cent of the economists surveyed expect him to be renominated, while
18 per cent believe governor Lael Brainard will be appointed.

About the survey
The FT-IGM US Macroeconomists Survey is a series of polls asking US academic
macroeconomists to predict the trajectory of important indicators such as gross domestic
product and unemployment, as well as to provide their views about likely key policy choices.
Questions have been developed in partnership with the Initiative on Global Markets at the
University of Chicago’s Booth School of Business, which will administer the survey to its panel of
leading economists approximately every two months.
Each edition of the survey asks a handful of the same questions, such as a question about US
GDP growth from the fourth quarter of 2020 to the final quarter of 2021, along with a few new
ones. Individual responses are anonymous. However, a list of respondents (typically around 50
economists), which may differ slightly from survey to survey, is provided alongside the results of
each survey.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
US economy
Covid-19
US interest rates
Monetary policy

