FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Unhedged

Inflation is still dead
Plus Apple’s buybacks

ROBERT ARMSTRONG

© FT montage/Dreamstime

Robert Armstrong and Aiden Reiter
Published SEP 12 2024

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
This article is an on-site version of our Unhedged newsletter. Premium subscribers can sign up
here to get the newsletter delivered every weekday. Standard subscribers can upgrade to
Premium here, or explore all FT newsletters

Good morning. Trump Media & Technology Group, owner of Truth Social, fell more than 10 per
cent yesterday. A judgment on the debate outcome? We doubt it. Meme stocks do not predict
elections. Email us: robert.armstrong@ft.com and aiden.reiter@ft.com.

CPI and the Fed
The August CPI inflation report was very good news, just like the three reports that preceded it.
Inflation is at the Fed’s target or very close to it, and there is no particular reason to worry about it
picking up again.
Awkwardly for Unhedged, this fact is not at all obvious when you look at the numbers the way we
usually do. We like to look at the month-to-month change in core inflation and annualise it — the
dark blue line in the chart below. That figure has now risen smartly for two months in a row.

The culprit — and this is a story of wearying familiarity — is almost entirely housing inflation. Here
is CPI shelter inflation, on the same basis:

I’m not sure why the official measure of shelter costs is jumping. It has leapt historically, and then
returned to trend — see the increases in January of this year and September of last year. What we
do know is that the private measures of rent inflation show no signs of a resurgence whatsoever.
Here are the national rent indices from the real estate sites Apartment List and Zillow:

Note that rent inflation is lower than it was pre-pandemic in both indices. In the case of Apartment
List, rent inflation has been negative for many months. Without rehearsing the tiresome niceties of
the methodology that contribute to the lag in timing, CPI shelter just has to fall eventually.
As an aside, it is notable that Apartment List’s index is usually lower than Zillow’s, and that the
difference has grown wider in the past couple of years. Chris Salviati of Apartment List told me the
difference is not methodology. Instead, it’s likely differences in the samples. Apartment List overindexes to large apartment complexes — and particularly those in the sunbelt. Those complexes are
facing competition from a surge in new multifamily construction. The institutional owners of the
complexes also respond to market shifts more quickly than non-institutional landlords; they have
access to more data and are “likely to place different weights on rent maximisation versus vacancy
risk compared to mom-and-pop landlords”.

In any case, inflation is beaten. And it does not look set to stage a comeback. The US economy is
cooling gently. Many global economies, notably China’s, are cooling non-gently. Commodity prices
are falling. Corporations have largely stopped taking price increases, and in some areas are offering
rebates. Wage growth is decelerating (and wages are historically closely linked to rents).
Which leads us to the Fed’s Open Market Committee and its decision, in a week’s time, of whether
to reduce its policy rate by 25 or 50 basis points. The futures market cut the odds of a 50-point cut
from 34 per cent to 15 per cent after Wednesday morning’s CPI report, according to the CME. As
we have just argued, there was nothing in the report to justify this. In fact, the report was another
confirmation that a big rate cut would create little risk of resurgent prices.
The economy, as we have argued at length in this space, looks fine despite a cooling labour market.
But with inflation risks off the table, why mess around? Rates are quite restrictive and don’t need
to be. A big cut would, if nothing else, improve home affordability, which is awful. In isolation, a
50- point cut makes sense.
The Fed does not work in isolation, though. Its reputation for steadiness and for caution in the face
of inflation is its critical asset, not just in this cycle but cycles to come. That, rather than the state of
the economy, is why the cut will be 25 basis points.

Apple revisited
A few days ago we pointed out — and not for the first time — that Apple has outperformed its Big
Tech peers (except Nvidia) in recent years, despite growing more slowly than they do. This is sort
of surprising. The best explanation we have been able to come up with (and it’s not very good) is
that Apple’s business is perceived as super stable. The market has concluded that once a customer
enters Apple world, they never leave, and spend ever-growing amounts within it.
Several readers wrote that we missed the obvious factor: Apple’s gigantic stock buyback
programme. The company has bought back $417bn in shares in the past five fiscal years. Alphabet,
the next biggest repurchaser in tech, has bought back $220bn; Microsoft and Meta have both
bought back about $120bn. Consequently, Apple’s share count has declined the most:

Of course, buybacks do support share prices, all else equal, to the degree they increase per share
financial performance. But the reduction in Apple’s share count has not been great enough to move
it up the Big Tech growth rankings. In terms of growth in earnings per share and free cash flow per
share, Apple significantly trails Alphabet, Meta and Microsoft.
So the idea has to be that Apple’s buyback programme keeps its share price high over and above
the impact it has on financial fundamentals. That is: Apple spends the cash it generates attempting
to manipulate (in a totally legal and transparent way) its own share price. And it works.
This might be true, but I can think of two somewhat vague reasons to doubt it. One of them is
Berkshire Hathaway, which on FT estimates sold $50bn in Apple shares in the second quarter of
this year. Apple spent $29bn on buybacks in the same quarter. The theory before us is that Apple is
such a huge consistent buyer of its own shares that it causes the price of its shares to be higher than
it would otherwise be. But in the second quarter there was a much bigger single seller. And what
happened during the quarter? Apple’s shares went up 24 per cent. Yes, lots of other stuff could
have been going on. But still.

The second point is vaguer still. Apple’s shares trade a lot. Over the past six months, average daily
trading volume, according to Bloomberg, is about 79mn shares a day. For Meta, the figure is a bit
more than 18mn shares a day. But Apple’s market capitalisation is not four times Meta’s; only
about 2.5 times. So shouldn’t Meta, trying to (legally and transparently) manipulate a less liquid
stock, get more bang for its buyback buck? On a very (very) rough calculation, Meta’s buyback
amounts to about 1.5 per cent of daily trading volume, and Apple’s is about 2.5 per cent. That’s
using long-term averages and I’m sure buyback programmes are executed unevenly, but the
argument remains. Adjusting for liquidity, Apple’s buyback is not all that much bigger than its
peers. Can it really explain Apple’s significant outperformance? I know there are traders out there
who will have a view on this. If you are one of them, and you are not an algorithm, please email me.

One good read
On corporate life cycles.

FT Unhedged podcast
Can’t get enough of Unhedged? Listen to our
new podcast, for a 15-minute dive into the
latest markets news and financial headlines,
twice a week. Catch up on past editions of
the newsletter here.

Recommended newsletters for you
Due Diligence — Top stories from the world of corporate finance. Sign up here
Chris Giles on Central Banks — Vital news and views on what central banks are thinking,
inflation, interest rates and money. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Robert Armstrong
Unhedged
US inflation
US equities
Markets

