FT PROFESSIONAL

Markets Briefing Equities

Wall Street stocks drop for third straight day on rate rise expectations
Investors await eurozone inflation data and US jobs figures due this week

Energy prices fell amid persistent concerns a slowdown in big economies would weaken global fuel demand © Alex Kraus/Bloomberg

Ian Johnston in London and Derek Brower and Kate Duguid in New York
Published AUG 30 2022 | Updated AUG 30 2022, 16:14

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
US and European stocks fell for a third straight day on Tuesday, as hawkish rhetoric from last
week’s economic conference in Jackson Hole fuelled expectations of higher interest rates.
The broad S&P 500 and the technology-heavy Nasdaq Composite ended the New York session
down 1.1 per cent.

In Europe, the regional Stoxx 600 gauge lost 0.7 per cent, while Germany’s Dax rose 0.5 per cent,
trimming earlier losses. London’s FTSE 100 fell 0.9 per cent following a one-day holiday.
Those moves followed two days of weakness in global equities, after central bankers reaffirmed
their commitment to tackling inflation at an annual summit in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, even as
the prospect of tighter monetary policy threatens to induce a protracted economic slowdown.
In a speech on Friday, Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell said the US central bank “must keep at it
until the job is done”, and that reducing inflation would probably result in lower economic growth
for a “sustained period”.
Signalling expectations of further tumult in stock markets, the Vix volatility index — known as Wall
Street’s “fear gauge” — registered a reading of 27.69 on Tuesday, its highest level since mid-July.
The Vix retreated slightly in late-day trade.
The index could rise further, warned Nicholas Colas, co-founder of DataTrek Research. “US
equities do not reflect sufficient fear given current macro and micro uncertainties,” he said.

The two-year US Treasury yield, which is sensitive to interest rate expectations, rose to 3.497 per
cent on Tuesday, continuing to hover at a 15-year high.
New York Fed president John Williams, in an interview with The Wall Street Journal on Tuesday,
said he believed the central bank needed to hold interest rates high through 2023 in order to rein
in inflation.
Oil prices plunged on Tuesday, amid persistent concerns a slowdown in big economies would
weaken global fuel demand and news that Iraq’s oil output had been unaffected by days of violence
in Baghdad.
Brent crude settled down 5.5 per cent at $99.31 a barrel. The international benchmark hit a onemonth-high of $105.48 a barrel on Monday following unrest in Iraq, the Opec cartel’s secondlargest crude exporter. US oil prices also fell 5.5 per cent on Tuesday to $91.64 a barrel.

“Oil prices started to fall during European hours driven by comments from Iraq’s state oil marketer
Somo saying oil exports have not been impacted from the political crisis,” said Giovanni Staunovo,
an oil analyst at UBS.
Robust supplies from Russia despite western sanctions on the country and the possibility of a
nuclear deal with Iran are also putting pressure on crude prices. Saudi Arabia, Opec’s de facto
leader, warned last week that the cartel could cut crude production in a bid to stabilise a market it
said was being undermined by “very thin liquidity and extreme price volatility”. Opec meets next
week to decide oil output policy.
Investors will scrutinise data in the coming days for further clues about the health of the global
economy and the future path of monetary policy. Economists polled by Reuters expect eurozone
inflation to have reached 9 per cent in August when figures are released on Wednesday, up from
8.9 per cent in July.
US jobs numbers on Friday may offer insights into the tightness of the labour market in the world’s
biggest economy. Economists polled by Reuters expect employers to have added 300,000 jobs in
August, down from 528,000 in July.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
European equities
US equities
Equities
Markets Briefing
Ian Johnston

