FT PROFESSIONAL

FT Swamp Notes US politics & policy

Higher for longer no matter who’s in charge
The reasons we aren’t going back to a cheap money environment are structural

© REUTERS

Rana Foroohar
Published NOV 4 2024

This article is an on-site version of our Swamp Notes newsletter. Premium subscribers can sign
up here to get the newsletter delivered every Monday and Friday. Standard subscribers can
upgrade to Premium here, or explore all FT newsletters

Election day is just hours away, and since the Financial Times will be giving you around-the-clock
coverage tomorrow (including news and opinion blogging), I am going to focus on an economic
topic — inflation.

This has obviously been a huge election topic and will be an ongoing issue for policymakers, no
matter who’s in charge. While overall inflation in the US is now 2.1 per cent, just a bit above the
Fed’s 2 per cent target, the core personal consumption expenditures index (the Fed’s preferred
metric) is now rising at its fastest level since April.
If we had no more inflation this year, the number would be right at the Fed target of 2 per cent.
But recent measures of GDP growth, personal income and even travel data all point to the same
conclusion — higher inflation is going to be baked in for a while.
The reasons we aren’t going back to a cheap-money environment aren’t as much cyclical as
structural. All of the major macro trends, with the exception of technological innovation, are
inflationary. Decoupling and reshoring? Inflationary. Regionalisation and re-industrialisation in
rich countries? Inflationary, because of the large amounts of capital spending involved. The clean
energy transition? Disinflationary longer term (since it will cut energy costs), but inflationary in
the short to medium term, as countries race to subsidise and roll out green technologies from wind
turbines to solar cells to lithium batteries and electric vehicles.
On that last note, while China is looking to dump cheap clean tech on to the global market through
a massive industrial stimulus programme designed to take slack from the overinflated housing
market, it is going to be politically impossible for the US and Europe to accept that. This recent FT
Big Read outlines how European carmakers are now experiencing the sharp end of Chinese
dumping in the EV space.
No matter who is in the Oval Office come January, I very much doubt that cheap Chinese goods are
going to be allowed to provide the disinflationary effect that they have in the past. The times in
which China could easily export its own economic problems — like unemployment and a dated
growth model — to the rest of the world are behind us.

Demographics are the final inflationary trend. The baby boomers are still healthy, working and
spending. They are not planning to transfer their wealth anytime soon — in fact, many of them
(like my own parents) are upsizing homes or going on major travel sprees. While economists have
always thought of ageing populations as being disinflationary, since older people spend less, I
suspect that this generation of boomers will buck the trend for years to come.
What will all this mean for the next president? For starters, I am expecting a big conversation
about debt and deficit, along with Federal Reserve independence. The future path of interest rates
will have major consequences for America’s fiscal trajectory, especially as the cost of interest on
government debt continues to exceed nearly every other part of the federal budget. According to
the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, a one percentage point increase in interest rates
beyond projections would add $2.9tn to the national debt by 2032.
That may, in and of itself, be inflationary if it erodes trust in America and thus raises the cost of
capital. Many international creditors are worried about the US political system, social cohesion and
the ability of either candidate to constrain debt loads (though it must be said that Kamala Harris’s
plan is expected to create half as much debt as Donald Trump’s would, and there’s even the
possibility that it could be net neutral for debt if it increases growth levels).
America’s future hangs in the balance no matter who wins the White House (see my column today
on how and whether nations in decline can ever renew themselves). Peter, do you agree that debt
loads will be an immediate challenge for the next president? Or do you figure it to be the usual
slow-burn issue that gets kicked to the curb yet again?

Recommended reading
Check out the FT’s up-to-the-minute campaign and election night coverage
here.
Here’s hoping the Economist is right, and that any stock market crash will
be less important and ultimately less painful than we might think.

Mike Hirsh looks at Donald Trump’s continuing relationship with Russia,
and why he may yet be in Vladimir Putin’s pocket.
And The New York Times’ Pamela Paul is right that there’s no escape from
the anxiety of the moment, even at the movies: Could someone please make
another La La Land.

Peter Spiegel responds
Rana, this is a tough one to answer because the urgency with which the federal government tackles
its deficit addiction is highly dependent on the whims of the financial markets. There were times
that so-called bond vigilantes had the upper hand and forced the White House to take deficit
reduction seriously. Remember the famous James Carville line during Bill Clinton’s presidency,
when he said that he hoped to be reincarnated as the bond market so he could “intimidate
everybody”?
That was 30 years ago, though, and we haven’t seen the sovereign debt markets express that kind
of concern for US borrowing for a long time. There has been some discussion about the recent selloff in Treasuries being blamed on a growing fear among bond traders that a Trump presidency will
wildly increase the deficit — but I’m not convinced. I think investors are more worried that the 50
basis point cut by the Fed in September went too far, especially at a time when asset prices are at
all-time highs and the economy is humming along at a strong pace.
What could trigger a negative reaction in Treasuries? I spent six years in Brussels covering the
eurozone debt crisis, and Greece was forced into a bailout because its debt load was viewed as
unsustainable. As I regularly remind colleagues, at the time of the first Greek bailout in 2010,
Athens’ debt was about 120 per cent of its economic output. What is the US’s debt-to-GDP ratio
now? According to the Saint Louis Fed, it’s 120 per cent. It’s not a good look to be at the same debt
levels as pre-bailout Greece.

Now, the US isn’t Greece. Treasuries remain a safe haven, meaning people invest in them
regardless of American debt levels because the US has a record of paying what it owes and still has
the biggest and strongest economy in the world. Also, unlike Greece, the US government has a
central bank that has proven willing to dip into the sovereign debt markets at times of crisis to fend
off vigilante attacks. As the late investment guru Martin Zweig once admonished: Don’t fight the
Fed. Nobody ever said that about the European Central Bank.
Still, there will come a time when the bond market becomes far less willing to fund the fiscal
deficits the US government has been running up since the financial crisis. Like it did in the 1990s,
the bond market will again start “intimidating everyone”. But until it does, I don’t see any new
president acting with any urgency to cut the national debt.

Your feedback
We’d love to hear from you. You can email the team on swampnotes@ft.com, contact Peter on
peter.spiegel@ft.com and Rana on rana.foroohar@ft.com, and follow them on X at
@RanaForoohar and @SpiegelPeter. We may feature an excerpt of your response in the next
newsletter

Recommended newsletters for you
US Election Countdown — Money and politics in the race for the White House. Sign up here
Unhedged — Robert Armstrong dissects the most important market trends and discusses how
Wall Street’s best minds respond to them. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy

US economy
US politics & policy
US presidential election 2024
Federal Reserve

