FT PROFESSIONAL

FT Swamp Notes Global Economy

Could inflation sink Biden?

US growth does not matter much to voters if interest rates remain elevated

© Bloomberg

Edward Luce
Published APR 12 2024

This article is an onsite version of our Swamp Notes newsletter. Premium subscribers can sign
up here to get the newsletter delivered every Monday and Friday. Standard subscribers can
upgrade to Premium here, or explore all FT newsletters

It was the last thing Joe Biden needed. America’s March inflation data that came out on
Wednesday has pretty much killed off any hope of a Fed rate cut before September, and possibly
even before the presidential election in November. This is bad news for a Democratic turnout
operation. From a voter sentiment point of view, it does not matter a great deal how high US
growth goes if interest rates remain at such elevated levels.
The futures markets are still pricing in one, possibly two, cuts this year. But monetary policy could
also go the wrong direction. According to Larry Summers, there is now a 15 to 25 per cent chance
that the next Fed move will be to raise rates rather than cut them. (Knowing that you’re a Swamp
Notes reader, Larry, I could not fail to notice that you have joined the bandwagon of people
growing beards: the good news is that you can cut it all off in one move.)
I am not the person to break down the inflation numbers for Swampians. But it is worth stressing
that the headline, core, and super core (services) inflation rates are all going the wrong way. At 3.8
per cent, the core rate is now almost double the Fed’s target number. Now, I can just about imagine
a super-interpretive Fed chair, Jay Powell, reasoning that another Donald Trump presidency would
be terrible for inflation — mass deportation, punitive tariffs on all imports, geopolitical uncertainty
and political risk. A couple of rate cuts before November would therefore be disinflationary since it
would assist Biden’s chances of re-election. Of course, this is a fantasy. The Fed is independent and
would commit hara-kiri before betraying any political bias. But I am not exaggerating the Fed’s
electoral influence.
In spite of everything, most voters are still unhappy about the state of the US economy. This has
caused great puzzlement among the political cognoscenti who keep telling Americans they have
never had it so good. Not only is inflation way down from where it was two years ago, they say, but
the much-threatened US recession never happened. All of this is true. But if you cannot afford the
mortgage on a new home and are still living with your parents or in an overcrowded rental with
your peers, the macro-numbers come as little consolation. What would really change your outlook
is lower interest rates. The political conventional wisdom also disapproves of how little the median
voter cares about the future of US democracy. Believe me, I share that existential dread of a
potential Trump second term. But most voters are tuned out, or write it off as “Cry Wolf”
syndrome.

More voters trust Trump over Biden, despite an improving economy
Who do you trust most to handle the economy?
Biden

Trump

Party affiliation

Gender

Republican
Independent
Democrat
100

Women
Men
50

0

50

100

100

50

0

50

100

Source: FT-Michigan Ross poll • Poll of 1,010 registered voters conducted Feb 29-Mar 4; margin of
error ±3.1pp. Those who responded 'not sure' were not included
FT graphic: Eva Xiao and Oliver Roeder

There are other questions such as abortion, which cuts Biden’s way, and immigration, which
favours Trump, that will sway voter choice and turnout in November. Israel will also play a role.
But nothing weighs as strongly on voter sentiment as the direction of US interest rates.
I have one caveat on this somewhat gloomy prognosis. In 2022, almost every economist was
forecasting that the US would go into recession. At the start of this year, the consensus was that the
Fed would cut rates six times. That had fallen to three cuts by this week. Now it is down to zero. In
other words, economists don’t have a clue what is going on. So they may be wrong about the Fed
now. That is really all I have got.
Having said that, Soumaya, unlike me, you are a real economist and you have the name to prove it
and I know you have more of a clue than me about what’s happening. My question to you is, what
is underpinning the stubbornness of US inflation, and might conditions surprise us again in the
coming months?

Save yourself a seat on May 4 in Washington, DC and online for the US FT Weekend Festival. As
a newsletter subscriber, claim a 15 per cent discount off your pass today using promo code
NewslettersxFestival!

Recommended reading
My column this week looks at America’s coming moment of truth on
Ukraine. “Trump’s Republican Party treats Ukraine as the enemy and
Russia as a friend,” I write. “Defining that stance as isolationist is lazy and
wrong. It is actively pro-Russian.”
Talking of inflation, my colleague Martin Wolf has an excellent tour
d’horizon of the new world of elevated public debt that we have entered,
and its potential inflationary impact. Almost every country’s balance sheet
is getting worse. He ends with a plea for a co-ordinated global fiscal
response, which he probably rightly dismisses as a pipe dream.
Finally, do read this revelatory piece by Uri Berliner, a senior journalist at
National Public Radio, on how that institution has lost the American
public’s trust. It is a familiar and cautionary tale about how ideological
takeover has distorted journalistic values and alienated the consumer.
Every journalist should read this.
Finally, do read whatever you can of the latest issue of Foreign Policy,
starting with the piece by its editor, Ravi Agrawal, on India. It comes ahead
of what looks like a third consecutive victory for Narendra Modi’s BJP in
the forthcoming elections — both an impressive feat and a depressing
augury of the rise of illiberal elective autocracy.
Our US Election Countdown newsletter delivers the latest news and polling data — including
charts from our award-winning data journalism team — with an emphasis on where big donors
are putting their cash. Click here to sign up.

Soumaya Keynes responds
Hi Ed,
First, I enjoyed your assessment that economists don’t know anything. Let’s keep expectations at
that level, please.
As for the stubbornness of US inflation, I’ve also been unpleasantly surprised. I at least hoped that
the predictions of “team long transitory” would prove correct, and that as the disruption of the
pandemic finally faded, inflation would fall back to a comfortable 2 per cent. But although it’s true
that prices of used cars and plane tickets have been falling, others haven’t behaved so helpfully.
Examples of areas where inflation has stayed stubbornly high include shelter and so-called
“transportation services”, which includes car insurance. I briefly fell into a rabbit hole investigating
whether the latter was because electric vehicles are more expensive to fix than their gas-guzzling
predecessors. But I hauled myself out by reminding myself that there’s always a story about one
particular sector. It’s safer to infer that the persistence of inflation is the outcome of deeper forces
including surprisingly strong demand.
Of course, conditions could surprise us again in the coming months. Economists don’t know
anything, remember?

Your feedback
We’d love to hear from you. You can email the team on swampnotes@ft.com, contact Ed on
edward.luce@ft.com and Soumaya on soumaya.keynes@ft.com, and follow them on X at
@SoumayaKeynes. and @EdwardGLuce. We may feature an excerpt of your response in the next
newsletter

Recommended newsletters for you
Unhedged — Robert Armstrong dissects the most important market trends and discusses how
Wall Street’s best minds respond to them. Sign up here
The Lex Newsletter — Lex is the FT’s incisive daily column on investment. Local and global
trends from expert writers in four great financial centres. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
US economy
US politics & policy
Federal Reserve
Joe Biden

