FT PROFESSIONAL

Markets Briefing Markets

US Treasuries sell off as investors fret over long period of high rates
Long-term yields highest in more than a decade and dollar strongest in 10 months

© FT montage/AP

Jaren Kerr in New York and Daria Mosolova in London
Published SEP 25 2023 | Updated SEP 25 2023, 16:37

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
Long-term Treasury yields hit multiyear highs and the dollar climbed on Monday as investors took
cues from central bankers and prepared for a lengthy period of high US interest rates.
The yield on the benchmark 10-year US Treasuries rose 0.10 percentage points to 4.54 per cent,
their highest level in 16 years, while that on the 30-year note was up 0.14 percentage points to 4.66
per cent, the highest level since 2011.

In Europe, the yield on the 10-year German Bund, the regional benchmark, rose to 2.81 per cent,
also its highest level since 2011. Bond yields rise as prices fall.
Global government debt has sold off in recent days as central banks suggested the global cycle of
interest rate rises is nearing its end, but signalled interest rates would need to stay high to tamp
inflation. The US Federal Reserve last week held interest rates at their highest level in 22 years, but
published projections showing fewer rate cuts in 2024 than markets had forecast.
“We have long thought that the equity market has been too aggressive in pricing in rate cuts,” UBS
analysts wrote on Monday. “A data dependent Fed has no incentive to sound soft on inflation.”
Some officials have also left the door open to further rate increases. Chicago Fed president Austan
Goolsbee on Monday said above-target inflation posed a greater risk to the economy than tight
policy.
“Many market participants have been investing on an assumption that rates would decline shortly
after reaching a peak,” said Tom Hopkins, portfolio manager at BRI Wealth Management.
“However, with economies remaining resilient and the labour market remaining tight, there is
more of a sense that rates will be held at or close to current levels well into next year.”
The dollar index, a measure of the greenback against six peer currencies, rose as much as 0.5 per
cent to eclipse the high it struck during March’s regional banking crisis and hit its strongest level
since November last year.

Wall Street’s benchmark S&P 500 closed 0.4 per cent higher, led by the energy and materials
sectors, and the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite advanced almost 0.5 per cent.
In Europe, the region-wide Stoxx Europe 600 fell 0.6 per cent and Germany’s Dax lost 1 per cent.
The downturn spread from China earlier on Monday, where declines in the once-dominant
property sector dragged Hong Kong’s Hang Seng down 1.8 per cent and the CSI 300 down 0.7 per
cent.
Asian markets were shaken by news that Chinese property giant Evergrande could not issue new
debt owing to an investigation into its principal subsidiary, Hengda Real Estate Group. Its shares
dropped more than a fifth and came two days after it warned it was cancelling some creditor
meetings to reassess terms for its restructuring.
The downturn reverberated across China’s faltering property market, with developer Longfor down
6.5 per cent, and Country Garden giving up 7.7 per cent. The Hang Seng Properties index lost 4.2
per cent in Hong Kong.

China’s property sector, which normally accounts for more than a quarter of activity in the world’s
second-largest economy, has stumbled since the start of the year as consumer demand struggled to
recover after three years of severe coronavirus pandemic restrictions.
Investors are preparing for data on inflation in the eurozone this week in the hope of gauging
policymakers’ plans for future rates. There are growing concerns that recent oil supply cuts could
fuel a second wave of inflation globally.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Currencies
Bonds
Commodities
Equities
Markets

