FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Markets Insight

The risk of a flip-flopping Fed
There is a danger of the classic ‘stop-go’ trap that haunted many western central
banks in the 1970s and 1980s

MOHAMED EL-ERIAN

US Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell. Good central bank policymaking calls for the Fed to lead markets rather than lag behind them ©
Getty Images

Mohamed El-Erian
Published JUN 29 2022

The writer is president of Queens’ College, Cambridge, and an adviser to Allianz and Gramercy
The markets are evolving their minds about US economic prospects just as the Federal Reserve has
been scrambling again to catch up to developments on the ground.

This risks yet another round of undue economic damage, financial volatility and greater inequality.
It also increases the probability of a return to the “stop-go” policymaking of the 1970s and 1980s
that exacerbates growth and inflation challenges rather than addressing them.
Good central bank policymaking calls for the Fed to lead markets rather than lag behind them, and
for good reasons. A well-informed Fed with a credible vision for the future minimises the risk of
disruptive financial market overshoots, strengthens the potency of forward guidance on policy and
provides an anchor of stability that facilitates productive physical investment and improves the
functioning of the real economy.
Coming into the second half of June, the Fed had already lagged behind markets twice in the past
12 months and in a consequential manner. First it stubbornly held on to its “transitory”
mischaracterisation of inflation until the end of November, thereby enabling the drivers of inflation
to broaden and become more embedded. Second, having belatedly course-corrected on the
characterisation, it failed to act in a timely and decisive manner — so much so that it was still
injecting exceptional liquidity into the economy in the week in March when the US printed a 7 per
cent-plus inflation print.
These two missteps have resulted in persistently high inflation that, at 8.6 per cent in May, is
hindering economic activity, imposing a particularly heavy burden on the most vulnerable
segments of the population, and has contributed to significant market losses on both stocks and
government bonds. Now a third mis-step may be in the making as indicated by developments last
week.
Having rightly worried about the Fed both underestimating the threat of inflation and failing to
evolve its policy stance in a timely manner, markets now feel that a late central bank scrambling to
play catch-up risks sending the US economy into recession. This contributed to sharply lower
yields on government bonds last week just as the Fed chair, Jay Powell, appeared in Congress with
the newly-found conviction that the battle against inflation is “unconditional”.

The markets are right to worry about a higher risk of recession. While the US labour market
remains strong, consumer sentiment has been falling. With indicators of business confidence also
turning down there is growing doubt about the ability of the private sector to power the US
economy through the major uncertainties caused by this phase of high inflation.
Other drivers of demand are also under threat. The fiscal policy impetus has shifted from an
expansionary to contractionary stance and exports are battling a weakening global economy. With
all this, it is not hard to see why so many worry about another Fed mis-step tipping the economy
into a recession.
In addition to undermining socio-economic wellbeing and fuelling unsettling financial instability,
such a mis-step would erode the institutional credibility that is so crucial for future policy
effectiveness. And it is not as if Fed credibility has not been damaged already.
In addition to lagging behind economic developments, the central bank has been repeatedly
criticised for its forecasts for both inflation and employment — the two components of its dual
mandate. A recent illustration of this was the sceptical reaction to the Fed’s update on monetary
policy released on June 15.
The scenario that worries the market — the Fed aggressively hiking rates only to be forced to
reverse by the end of this year due to the threat of recession — is certainly a possibility, and it is not
a comforting one.
There is another equally possible alternative, if not more likely and more damaging economically
and socially: A multi-round flip-flopping Fed.
In this scenario, a Fed lacking credibility and sound forecasts would fall in the classic “stop-go”
trap that haunted many western central banks in the 1970s and 1980s and remains a problem for
some developing countries today lacking policy conviction and commitment. This is a world in
which policy measures are whipsawed, seemingly alternating between targeting lower inflation and
higher growth, but with little success on either. It is a world in which the US enters 2023 with both
problems fuelling more disruption to economic prosperity and higher inequality.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Mohamed El-Erian
Markets Insight
US economy
US inflation
Central banks

