FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Markets Insight

US inflation surge signals tough times ahead
The damage from the sharp rise in prices has already been unleashed

MOHAMED EL-ERIAN

The Federal Reserve is sure to increase interest rates by 0.75 percentage points later this month and could consider a 1 percentage
point rise © AFP via Getty Images

Mohamed El-Erian
Published JUL 13 2022

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
The writer is president of Queens’ College, Cambridge, and an adviser to Allianz and Gramercy
June’s awful US inflation numbers are a reminder of tough days ahead for many in America and
around the world, and especially the most vulnerable segments of the population and the most
fragile developing countries.

This is not because inflation will record yet another four-decade high over the next three months. It
won’t. Rather, it is because of the damage already unleashed and that which is to come.
At 9.1 per cent for June, the headline number for US CPI inflation came in well above the median
forecast of 8.8 per cent, registering its highest level since 1981. The core measure was also higher
than expected and the compositional details added to concerns.
This level of inflation will come as a shock to many, especially those who have been falsely
comforted by a US Federal Reserve narrative that, from day one of this inflation episode, has failed
to understand the dynamics in play, grasp the seriousness of what’s ahead, and act promptly and
decisively to avoid undue harm to so many.
The stunning number, which will be splashed across the front pages of newspapers and dominate
news shows and websites, will further erode the already-damaged policy credibility of the Fed and
undermine the effectiveness of its all-important forward guidance tool.
And this is a Fed that, unlike the European Central Bank, is yet to explain why it has forecast
inflation so wrong for so long; and unlike the Bank of England, is yet to play the technocratic role
of an honest adviser on what is going on in the economy and why.
The Fed now has no choice but to respond aggressively. It is sure to increase interest rates by 0.75
percentage points later this month and could well consider a 1 percentage point rise.
Such a belated policy reaction will increase the risk of a recession, especially given that economic
activity is slowing. This adds the curse of income insecurity to the serious erosion in purchasing
power caused by inflation — phenomena that hits the low income earners particularly hard.
Fortunately, inflation will come down over the next three months. That’s the good news. Less good
is the continued broadening of price pressures that was evident in today’s detailed data. That adds
to the considerable uncertainty that surrounds the stickiness of an inflation process that the Fed
has allowed to get more entrenched into the economy.

FT survey: How are you
handling higher
inflation?

As such, and especially if the Fed fails to get its act
together quickly, it would be foolish to dismiss the
chance of a third wave of inflationary pressures that
would interrupt and reverse the downward
movement of the next three months.
The implications of all this go well beyond the US.
This high inflation, and the monetary policy reaction
it will entail, will add fuel to the phenomenon of

We are exploring the impact of rising
living costs on people around the
world and want to hear from readers
about what you are doing to combat
costs. Tell us via a short survey.

“little fires everywhere” and is particularly
worrisome for developing countries already dealing
with food and energy insecurity.
They now face a further tightening of global financial
conditions, as well as increased dollar appreciation
that aggravates their imported inflation and risks

destabilising their debt sustainability and the domestic financial markets.
Have no doubt: the latest inflation numbers are indicative of rough seas ahead, particularly for the
most vulnerable segments of society in the US and around the globe. And to think that much of this
could have been avoided had the world’s most powerful central bank been more responsive with its
policy tools — and not stuck so doggedly to its stance that inflation rises last year were just
“transitory”.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Mohamed El-Erian
Markets Insight

Global inflation
US economy
US inflation

