FT PROFESSIONAL

US Treasury bonds

US bond yield slide hits dollar
Treasury yields have declined amid signs US economic growth is slowing

Ian Smith in London and Harriet Clarfelt in New York
Published FEB 25 2025 | Updated FEB 25 2025, 13:10

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
A fall in US bond yields is piling pressure on the dollar, as investors bet that slowing economic
growth will push the Federal Reserve to keep cutting interest rates despite persistent inflation.
The 10-year Treasury yield fell as low as 4.28 per cent on Tuesday, the lowest level since midDecember. The decline from above 4.8 per cent last month has been prompted by a worsened
outlook for US growth, after a string of data showed weak consumer and business sentiment.

That has hit the dollar, which is down 2 per cent this year against a basket of its peers, confounding
expectations that Donald Trump’s return to the White House would continue to bolster the
currency. The dollar had previously strengthened on bets that the inflationary effect of the new
president’s tariffs and immigration curbs would prevent the Fed from cutting rates.
“Slowing growth and higher inflation expectations is a more negative mix for the US dollar,” said
Lee Hardman, senior currency analyst at banking group MUFG.
Investors say the fall in real Treasury yields, which represent the return on offer after inflation is
taken into account, has been a particularly significant driver of the currency.
The yield on 10-year Treasury inflation-protected securities (Tips) fell as low as 1.89 per cent on
Tuesday, the lowest since early December and down from 2.3 per cent last month.

Persistent inflationary pressures have put the Fed in a bind, as it would naturally respond by
slowing or ending its rate-cutting cycle, or even signal rate rises. But flagging growth — and
repeated broadsides from Trump demanding that Fed chair Jay Powell lower borrowing costs —
are pushing in the other direction.
Trump initially sharply criticised the Fed after it held rates last month, but later said it was “the
right thing to do”.
JPMorgan analysts highlighted in a note last week the “significant erosion of US real yields [due] to
unresponsive Fed policy in the face of a sharp tariff-induced surge in front-end inflation”.
Near-term inflation expectations have climbed as investors price in the likely impact of Trump’s
tariffs. So-called two-year break-evens — which measure the difference between real yields and
nominal yields and are investors’ best guess on where inflation is headed — last week reached their
highest since early 2023.
US inflation unexpectedly increased to 3 per cent in January and the latest Fed minutes warned of
the “upside risk” for inflation. Consumer expectations of long-term price rises are at their highest
since 1995.
Even so, investors are betting the Fed will lower rates by a further half percentage point by the end
of the year.
Fund managers said the market was taking a dimmer view of the threat to domestic growth from
the stop-start trade war launched by the new president, as well as other policies such as an
immigration crackdown and sweeping job cuts in the public sector.
Nominal US Treasury yields have also fallen sharply since their peak in mid-January.

“Markets are asking if we have seen peak US exceptionalism,” said Matthew Morgan, head of fixed
income at Jupiter Asset Management, adding that uncertainty over the path of monetary policy, as
well as tariffs, government cuts and other areas, “may mean less investment, hiring and growth”.
Besides the weaker dollar and lower yields, he said, “the next question will be whether a repricing
of US growth leads to a repricing of risk assets”. After hitting a series of record highs, stocks have
lost ground in recent sessions.
An S&P survey of purchasing managers published last week showed the US services sector had
contracted for the first time in more than two years.
UBS analysts said earlier this month that falling real yields, while inflation expectations remained
high, reflected a “stagflationary impulse” from tariffs.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US Treasury bonds
US economy
US dollar
Ian Smith
Harriet Clarfelt

