FT PROFESSIONAL

Federal Reserve

Federal Reserve signals more scepticism over need for further rate rises
Cautious stance tempered by fears over ‘upside risks’ to inflation

Inflation remains too high for the Fed’s liking, even as price pressures have eased in recent weeks and are expected to keep easing in
the coming months © Reuters

Colby Smith in Washington
Published AUG 16 2023 | Updated AUG 16 2023, 17:06

Federal Reserve officials have become more wary about the need to keep raising interest rates
despite fearing the US central bank has not won its battle against inflation, according to minutes
from its July meeting.
Officials unanimously backed a quarter-point increase at last month’s meeting. However, a number
of policymakers were concerned that the risk of “overtightening” monetary policy versus not doing
enough had become more evenly balanced or “two sided”, the minutes showed.
That reflected a new cautious tone from the Fed, signalling the central bank is nearing the end of
its historic rate-rising campaign.

However, US markets sold off on Wednesday with the Nasdaq Composite and the S&P 500 closing
down 1.2 per cent and 0.8 per cent, respectively.
Investors sold Treasury holdings as well, sending the 10-year yield to a 10-month high of 4.28 per
cent. The two-year yield, which moves with interest rate expectations, rose 0.02 percentage points
to 4.97 per cent.
Even as policymakers continued to fret about the risks of elevated inflation, the minutes showed
growing unease among some officials about how much more the Fed should squeeze the economy
given expectations that consumer spending will soon slow more notably, the labour market is
cooling, and tighter credit conditions are beginning to bite.
A couple of participants indicated a preference to hold rates steady at the July meeting, arguing
that doing so “would likely result in further progress toward the committee’s goals while allowing
the committee time to further evaluate this progress”.
In a sign that officials are still on edge, however, most still saw “significant upside risks” to
inflation, which they warned “could require further tightening of monetary policy”.
The minutes also noted that officials need further evidence that price pressures are subsiding in
order to become more confident that inflation is “clearly on a path” back to the 2 per cent target.
Economists at Morgan Stanley said the differing opinions reflected “continued disagreement
over . . . the need for further tightening” and suggested that while the July decision was unanimous
it was “perhaps non-unanimous in spirit”.
July’s quarter-point increase raised the federal funds rate to a target range of 5.25-5.5 per cent, the
highest level in 22 years. It followed a brief pause in June, when officials adopted a more gradual
approach to tightening monetary policy following the most aggressive campaign in decades.
Economists broadly expect that last month’s rate increase will have been the final one of the year,
even though the central bank’s officials in June projected the benchmark rate would peak a quarter
of a percentage point higher at 5.5-5.75 per cent.

Nancy Vanden Houten, lead US economist at Oxford Economics, said the minutes made clear that
further rate rises were not “preordained” and maintained her call that the Fed had already
concluded its campaign to raise borrowing costs.
Fed chair Jay Powell stressed last month that the Federal Open Market Committee would digest
the “totality” of the economic data ahead of the next meeting in September, but acknowledged that
“given how far we’ve come, we can afford to be a little patient” when it comes to further rate rises.
Inflation remains too high for the Fed’s liking, even as price pressures have eased in recent weeks
and are expected to keep receding in the coming months.
While labour market demand has further slowed, consumer spending on goods and services has
remained strong despite higher borrowing costs than just over a year ago, when the Fed’s
benchmark interest rate hovered near zero.
Fears that the US economy would tumble into recession have ebbed as a result, with Fed staffers
scrapping their call for a mild contraction this year. Still, they expect a “noticeable slowdown in
growth”, according to Powell, who has long been optimistic about the prospects for a so-called soft
landing. That would translate to a small increase in the unemployment rate from its current level of
3.5 per cent, the minutes said.
Pausing rate rises again in September would give the Fed more time to take stock of how the
economy is responding to earlier increases, or whether borrowing costs need to rise further to fully
tame inflation.
Officials concluded that there was significant uncertainty about whether the rate rises of the past
18 months were cooling the economy sufficiently. They reiterated, however, that tighter credit
conditions stemming from this year’s regional banking crisis would weigh on economic activity in
the coming months.
While officials continue to debate the need for additional action, they appear more unified about
keeping the benchmark rate at a level that restrains demand for an extended period. No official has
suggested the Fed will cut rates again this year. According to futures markets, traders broadly
expect the central bank to hold off cuts until well into 2024.

When the Fed eventually cuts its benchmark rate, the minutes indicated several officials want the
central bank to keep shrinking its roughly $8tn balance sheet by ceasing to reinvest the proceeds of
maturing Treasuries and agency mortgage-backed securities.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
US economy
US inflation
US interest rates
Federal Reserve
US

