FT PROFESSIONAL

Federal Reserve

Donald Trump’s tariffs put Federal Reserve’s jobs and inflation goals at risk, says Jay
Powell
US central bank chair says ‘without price stability, we cannot achieve long periods of strong labour market
conditions’
Claire Jones in Washington
Published APR 16 2025 | Updated APR 17 2025, 01:51

PLAY | 00:44

Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell: 'My hope is that we'll get through this and get back what we're always
going to be aiming for, maximum employment and price stability' © Reuters
Donald Trump’s tariffs are “likely” to put at risk the Federal Reserve’s goals of keeping prices and
unemployment in check, chair Jay Powell warned, as he emphasised the US central bank’s focus on
inflation.

The Fed chief said on Wednesday: “The [Trump] administration is implementing significant policy
changes and particularly trade is now the focus. The effects of that are likely to move us away from
our goals.”
While US rate setters would aim to “balance” their goals of keeping inflation near 2 per cent and
maximising employment, they would need to remember that “without price stability, we cannot
achieve long periods of strong labour market conditions”, Powell said in remarks to the Economic
Club of Chicago.
Powell also said the president’s tariffs announced so far had been “significantly larger than
anticipated”, adding that “the same was likely to be true of the economic effects, which will include
higher inflation and slower growth”.
US stocks extended a sell-off that began earlier on Wednesday as the Fed chair spoke, with the S&P
500 ending the day down 2.2 per cent.
European and Asian stocks were mixed on Thursday, with China’s CSI 300 flat and Japan’s Topix
up 1.3 per cent. The Stoxx Europe 600 was down 0.1 per cent and the FTSE 100 was 0.6 per cent
lower in early trading.
Powell said Trump’s tariffs might place US rate setters “in the challenging scenario in which our
dual-mandate goals are in tension”.
“If that were to occur, we would consider how far the economy is from each goal, and the
potentially different time horizons over which those respective gaps would be anticipated to close,”
Powell said.
Several Fed officials — including John Williams, head of the New York Fed, and governor
Christopher Waller — have said inflation is likely to surge in the coming months on the back of the
administration’s proposed tariffs.
While Waller thinks the impact of tariffs will prove shortlived, other members of the rate-setting
Federal Open Market Committee which Powell chairs believe Trump’s tariffs have increased the
odds that inflation will be a longer problem for US consumers.

Trump has repeatedly called on the Fed to cut interest rates, posting on his Truth Social platform
last month that officials should act as “US Tariffs start to transition (ease!) their way into the
economy”.
The Fed’s preferred personal consumption expenditures price index rose at an annual pace of 2.5
per cent in February, above the central bank’s target.
Recent surveys have shown that consumers and businesses are expecting strong price rises in the
near future as the new taxes on imports ripple through the economy.
The Trump administration’s policies have placed the Fed in “wait and see” mode, after the FOMC
made a series of cuts over the second half of last year.
The US central bank has kept its benchmark federal funds target range at 4.25-4.5 per cent this
year, with officials saying they are well-placed to respond once the economic data show the effects
of the president’s policies on American businesses and households.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Trump tariffs
US economy
US inflation
US interest rates
Central banks

