FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Federal Reserve

What Jay Powell should say at Jackson Hole
Without seeking to influence the election, the Fed chair must remind the public of some basic economic
truths

ADAM POSEN

Jay Powell, chair of the Federal Reserve. Like central bankers around the world, he faces having to provide public reality checks, even
in the midst of a contentious election © Getty Images

Adam Posen
Published AUG 22 2024

The writer is president of the Peterson Institute for International Economics

Elections, especially contentious ones, are challenging for independent central banks. Monetary
policymakers can neither know what macroeconomic policies will be chosen next nor speak frankly
about the implications of the candidates’ policy proposals — they obviously don’t want to be
branded as partisan. Making a realistic conditional forecast, let alone a public one, is more or less
impossible.
Yet when the result of an election is uncertain, and the parties have very different fiscal, currency,
trade and regulatory policy positions — as is the case in the US right now — plans for monetary
policy must turn on outcome. The overwhelming confidence of markets and the public that the
Federal Reserve is going to embark in September on a cycle of interest rate cuts through 2025 and
2026 means a sudden shift in policy will be particularly damaging.
Like all central banks, the Fed hates to make abrupt changes of direction unless there is an obvious
shock, like Covid in March 2020 or the collapse of Lehman Brothers and AIG in September
2008. But given the economic outlook for the US post-election, the Fed needs to prepare itself, and
the public, for at least the high probability of a shift to tightening by mid-2025.
Under either a Harris or a Trump administration, fiscal policy is likely to be loose. And if Trump
wins, the threat of inflation will be greater. Tariffs would go up substantially across a range of
countries and industries, which would be inflationary. Large-scale deportation of migrant workers
— as Trump and the Republicans commit to enacting — would be stagflationary, driving up prices
through shortages of workers in particular sectors and cutting back production sharply.
Under Trump, there also would be an unsustainable boom through deregulation of energy,
environment and labour — this would cause rotation from big and green tech to fossil fuels and old
manufacturing, which would also be inflationary. He and his running mate have threatened the
independence of the Fed and the strength of the dollar.

Of course, this inflation and the need for the Fed to raise may not materialise. The US could
already be heading for a recession that this year’s expected 50-75 basis points of Fed rate cuts and
fiscal laxity will not be enough to prevent. Net fiscal policy could go into restrictive mode because
of political breakdown, perhaps due to turmoil surrounding the election result. The recessionary
effects of mass deportations by a Trump administration could hit harder and faster than their
inflationary impact. But for all that, the likelihood of inflation accelerating in 2025 remains
considerable.
So what should Fed chair Jay Powell say in his speech at this week’s central bankers’ symposium in
Jackson Hole?
He should make it clear that the Fed’s monetary policy stance could reverse after the election, even
if it sets up rate cuts in the coming weeks. He should also remind markets and households of basic
economic realities.
Powell has already, bravely and rightly, made statements about the supply side benefits of
migration. He should reiterate the stagflationary effects of mass deportation and point out that the
vast majority of tariffs are paid for by US purchasers, and therefore will stoke inflation. And he
should do the usual central banker talk about the unsustainability of the current fiscal trajectory.
Central bankers around the world often find themselves in the position of having to provide public
reality checks, even in the midst of contentious elections. The fact that this is now necessary for the
Fed shows the extent to which the political debate around economic policy in the US has
degenerated. As with the Bank of England ahead of Brexit, or central banks in developing countries
prone to high inflation, someone has to remind the public of some basic truths about economic
policy — while avoiding saying anything about the competing parties or candidates.
This is not about influencing the election outcome or an elected president’s policy choices. This is
about being honest with the American people about the risks monetary policy must face.

Rather than simply hoping the factors that would drive a reversal in policy will not arise, or that
changing course abruptly when inflation is already here would be more politically prudent, the Fed
needs to start laying the groundwork for a possible pivot now. Leaving the change in forecast to a
November surprise, or more likely waiting until the federal budget passes Congress in March or
April of next year, will set markets and households up for a shock. That would compound the
damage caused by the errors that an administration of either stripe will inevitably make.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Adam Posen
Global inflation
US politics & policy
US interest rates
Central banks

