FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion The FT View

How to make sense of the inflation data
Surveys of expectations suggest price rises are broadening

THE EDITORIAL BOARD

In the US, the Delta variant appears to have done little to dim consumers’ appetite to spend © David Paul Morris/Bloomberg

The editorial board
Published SEP 19 2021

Few questions are more fundamental for the future direction of the recovery from the coronavirus
pandemic — and investors’ potential returns — than the path of inflation. High prices for stocks
and bonds are predicated on monetary policy remaining easy and interest rates low. Rising
inflation would demonstrate how widespread the reported shortages and bottlenecks really are,
and in turn how much, whatever their impact on interest rates, they will limit the ability of the
economy to grow.

Yet despite the importance of the question, a clear answer remains elusive. Figures published last
week from the US and UK pointed, on the surface, in opposite directions. The headline rate of
inflation fell in the US in August, from 5.4 per cent to 5.3 per cent, while across the pond the rate
increased to 3.2 per cent, from 2 per cent. Despite the main UK figure being distorted by
comparisons to a year ago — last August restaurant visitors were enjoying the Eat Out to Help Out
subsidy and a value added tax break for hospitality — the British month-on-month increase was
the fastest on record.
As lockdown restrictions have eased, inflation hawks have argued that recent increases are likely to
be just the first tremors of a more permanent “regime shift” in the behaviour of economies that,
before the pandemic at least, had not seen sustained rates of high inflation for decades. Doves, on
the other hand, point out that much of the increase has been due to the particular oddities of
economies moving out of a pandemic-induced deep freeze. Some friction was understandable as
spending habits quickly readjusted and production had to catch up.
Hawks focused on the dramatic increase in the headline rate — reaching 5.4 per cent for the US in
July, the highest rate since 2008 — while doves urged a closer examination of details which showed
that just a handful of unusual goods were responsible for the increase. US used car prices, for
instance, were around a third higher in August than a year before; in the UK they were about 18 per
cent higher. Prices for lumber, a bottleneck holding back construction in the US earlier this year,
have now cratered.
The latest data invite a reversal of those positions: while inflation fell in the US in August the
breakdown suggests price pressures are broadening out. The cost of renting houses — where prices
are stickier than they are on second-hand car lots — was 0.3 per cent higher in August than during
July, leaving it 2.5 per cent higher than a year ago. That suggests landlords, as well as renters, are
now anticipating that higher price pressure is here to stay. Indeed, American consumers’ inflation
expectations rose for the tenth consecutive month.

Retail sales data complicate the debate further. In the US, the Delta variant appears to have done
little to dim consumers’ appetite to spend — potentially producing even more inflationary pressure.
Retail sales rose in August, although possibly shoppers switched spending from restaurants and
bars. But UK retail sales fell unexpectedly for the fourth month in a row, perhaps as the reverse
happened.
The picture may still be murky but the outlines are becoming clearer. The doves were right that the
stunning inflation numbers earlier this year were distorted by temporary factors; August’s decline
in US inflation is partly explained by a slight fall in used car prices. Hawks were right, however, to
worry that these temporary factors may become embedded in more long-term expectations.
Central banks have already set out how they plan to “taper” their support. Now they should stand
ready to accelerate such plans.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
The editorial board
The FT View
Global inflation
UK economy
US inflation

