FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Central banks

Complacency led policymakers to misdiagnose inflation
Politicians and central bankers took their eyes off price problems but running a high
pressure economy is dangerous

CHRIS GILES

Central bankers bear particular responsibility in this messy tale © Matthew Horwood/Getty Images

Chris Giles
Published JUN 23 2022

A year ago, inflation appeared under control. Published annual consumer price rises stood at 2 per
cent in the eurozone and 2.1 per cent for the UK in May 2021. The 5 per cent figure for the US was
higher than normal, but the Federal Reserve dismissed concerns, saying price rises reflected
“transitory factors” with chair Jay Powell highlighting lumber and used car prices that were
temporarily high and airline and hotel costs that were just climbing back to normal.

What has happened since has surprised all the main advanced economy central banks. The latest
published inflation rates stand at 8.6 per cent in the US, 8.1 per cent in the eurozone and 9.1 per
cent in the UK. Instead of always blaming something out of their control, central bankers are now
taking action.
We should therefore use this moment to take stock. What were the mistakes made in thinking over
the past year? And what does this mean for policy and the economic outlook?
Fundamentally, we have rediscovered that resource constraints are real and they matter. With
unemployment at multi-decade lows in North America and Europe, there was less scope than after
the global financial crisis for households, government or companies to increase spending without
generating significant inflationary pressure. Sometimes, of course, resource constraints have also
been caused by supply chain bottlenecks, but both represent demand exceeding supply and both
are inflationary.
Instead of focusing closely on the constraints, politicians and central bankers placed too much
emphasis on the data from after the 2008-09 global financial crisis showing unemployment
changes had little impact on wages or prices. Inflation had been low and steady both when
joblessness was high and when it came down. Policymakers misdiagnosed this “flat Phillips curve”
as a regularity, and that led to complacency. The thinking was that inflation was dead and there
were few risks in running a high-pressure economy. We now know this was dangerously wrong.
Central bankers bear particular responsibility in this messy tale. For the past two decades, they
convinced themselves the public believed them to be such wonderful price controllers that they
could sit back and relax. No company would seek to push prices higher and no worker would seek
inflation-busting pay rises because they knew it would be defeated by the central bank.
They believed their credibility was rock solid, so low and stable inflation was a self-fulfilling
prophesy. That theory has failed and they are now in a fight to regain public trust. It is not
surprising, for example, that net satisfaction with the Bank of England’s inflation management has
fallen to its lowest level on record.

The result of these analytical failings and complacency has been the recent rapid rises in interest
rates, designed to show central banks are serious about defeating inflation. But this merely brings
us to the next problem. All the main models used for managing inflation have been calibrated
during a period of price stability and tell us very little about how far to tighten monetary policy
when you’ve lost control.
Some of the rise in inflation is still temporary, but much will need to be squeezed from economies
without anyone knowing exactly how much pressure to apply. This means the dangers of excessive
tightening are as great as continuing to do too little, too late.
In such a difficult world, no one should rule out recessions in the year ahead. The Fed is probably
correct to raise interest rates hard, but the truth is that we really don’t know.
Further mistakes in monetary policy are highly likely and we should expect reversals in policy as
central banks try to find the right response to a problem they did not think could happen.
chris.giles@ft.com

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Chris Giles
US inflation
Covid-19
UK politics
Central banks

