FT PROFESSIONAL

FT Books Essay Economics books

A matter of interest — the battle over monetary policy
Former Fed chair Ben Bernanke and historian Edward Chancellor offer conflicting perspectives on the crisis
in central banking

Postwar inflation reveals itself in the changing prices at a vendor’s stall in France in the late 1940s © US Department of
State/PhotoQuest/Getty Images

Martin Wolf

Published JUL 27 2022

Inflation is back. Rising prices have placed a “cost of living crisis” at the top of the economic,
political and social agenda. Inevitably, this has brought central banks and monetary policy under
the spotlight. Yet controversies over both are not new. On the contrary, while the issues change,
debate over how monetary and financial stability can best be sustained abides. Though completed
before inflation returned, two new books set out sharply conflicting perspectives on underlying
issues.
In the orthodox corner stands Ben Bernanke, a governor of the Federal Reserve from 2002 and
chair from 2006 to 2014, a period that includes the global financial crisis of 2007-09. Arguably,
Bernanke is the most influential thinker and practitioner on central banking of our era. His book,
21st Century Monetary Policy, offers a lucid account of the evolution of central banking and the
US central bank from the “great inflation” of the late 1960s, 1970s and early 1980s to today and
into the future.
In the opposite corner stands Edward Chancellor, historian, asset manager, journalist and author.
The Price of Time offers a history of interest back to the Babylonians as well as of the debate over
the legitimacy of demanding it at all. Mainly, however, it is a polemic against everything Bernanke
stands for. For Chancellor, the rate of interest is “the price of time” — the rate at which the money
one expects to receive or pay in future should be adjusted into today’s. Under the influence of
people such as Bernanke, he asserts, interest rates have been far too low for far too long, with
ruinous results.
Behind each of them stands a different guru. For Bernanke, it is John Maynard Keynes, the
pioneering British economist. As he notes: “Keynesian economics, in a modernised form, remains
the central paradigm at the Fed and other central banks.” The main aim of monetary policy, then,
is to achieve and sustain full employment.

If inflation tends to rise, demand must be too strong; and if it falls too low, demand must be too
weak. This, then, makes inflation the best intermediate target of policy. Yet this target must also
not be too close to zero: central banks would have too little room to cut rates in response to
recession. That is the “trap” into which Japan fell in the 1990s and from which it has had such
difficulty escaping.
Bernanke’s book explores three fundamental realities of past decades.
The first is the surprisingly weak response of inflation to changes in
unemployment in recent years. In the past, low levels of
unemployment tended to raise prices faster. The second is “the longterm decline in the normal level of interest rates”, partly because of
lower inflation but also because of the long-term decline in real rates
of interest. The third is the “increased risk of systemic financial
instability” in our world of globalised and liberalised finance.
In terms of policy, explains Bernanke, short-term rates of interest
came very close to, reached or, in some cases, even fell below zero in the aftermath of the global
financial crisis and subsequent eurozone crisis. This drove the Fed and other central banks towards
a range of “unconventional” policies, including large-scale asset purchases (generally known as
“quantitative easing”) and “forward guidance” on future monetary policy.
Overall, Bernanke insists, the Fed has been successful in preventing another Great Depression and
returning the US economy to growth. I agree with him.
Chancellor emphatically does not. His guru is

[Chancellor] condemns the low
interest rates adopted by
central banks as the root of
almost all economic evils

Friedrich Hayek, a contemporary of Keynes, leading
figure in the Austrian “free-market” school of
economics and opponent of central banking. Hayek
was also an exponent of the “malinvestment”
explanation of depressions, according to which the
slump represented the necessary purgation of

previous errors.

Hayek lost the debate on macroeconomics in the 1930s and moved on to political economy,
especially with The Road to Serfdom, published in 1944, which found an acolyte in Margaret
Thatcher. Chancellor is a believer in the Hayek of the 1930s, however. He condemns the low
interest rates adopted by central banks as the root of almost all economic evils.
Ultra-low interest rates are to his mind the malign product of the false credo of inflation targeting.
As he complains: “Never mind that zero interest rates discouraged savings and investment, and
impaired productivity growth. Never mind that ultra-low interest rates, by keeping zombie
companies on life-support, resulted in the survival of the least fit. Never mind that central bank
policies contributed to rising inequality, undermined financial stability, encouraged ‘hot money’
capital flows, and fostered numerous asset price bubbles from luxury apartments to
cryptocurrencies.”
Does this charge sheet make sense? Not much.
Low interest rates have substitution and income effects: the former make it attractive to save less,
because of the lower returns; but the latter make it necessary to save more, to compensate for the
lower returns. Chancellor himself quotes Raghuram Rajan, former governor of the Reserve Bank of
India, to the effect that “savers put more money aside as interest rates fall in order to meet the
saving they think they will need when they retire”. The outcome of low interest rates for overall
saving rates is simply ambiguous.
Again, Chancellor insists that lower rates discourage investment, even
though he stresses that they do motivate risk-taking. Why, then, would
they not encourage more risk-taking investment? A low interest rate
environment is, after all, one in which funding, including equity
funding, will be cheap. If good investment opportunities do indeed
exist, as Chancellor insists, why would low interest rates be a
prohibitive obstacle to funding them?

The survival of “zombies” might be a partial explanation. But dynamic businesses should be able to
outbid zombie firms for workers, suppliers and customers. Moreover, businesses able to cover their
variable costs should survive. True, if one closed down most marginally productive businesses, the
productivity of workers who remain employed would rise. But the productivity of the overall
workforce would fall, which would be a bad bargain.
Again, the argument that low interest rates increase inequality is grossly misleading. Even a
doubling of the wealth of billionaires has no real significance to people who own next to nothing.
Thus, according to the 2020 US Census, the median net worth of the bottom 20 per cent of US
households was minus $6,029 and the median net worth of the next 20 per cent was just $7,263.
What matters to such people is not how immensely rich Elon Musk is, but whether they actually
have a job. Active responses to recessions by central banks help them achieve this. If Chancellor
really cares about inequality, what about campaigning for wealth taxes?
Chancellor also has many complaints about the effect of low interest rates on financial instability
and fragility. Yet it is unlikely that the modestly higher interest rates he recommends would have
saved the world from financial crises. The world of 19th-century America, without central banking,
saw plenty of them. That is why the Federal Reserve was created in the early 20th century.

What, above all, is the author’s alternative to the low interest rates he despises? A depression.
Indeed, he insists that “[t]he broad economy benefits from this dose of salts”. He even goes so far
as to cite Andrew Mellon, the treasury secretary of Herbert Hoover, who notoriously advised his
boss to “liquidate labour, liquidate stocks, liquidate the farmers, liquidate real estate”. Mellon
might have added “liquidate democracy”. In Germany, chancellor Heinrich Brüning managed to
achieve just that as he prepared the ground for Hitler.
Bubbles are terrible, insists Chancellor. Mass unemployment? Fine.
In sum, Chancellor has written an overheated and unbalanced polemic. Yet this does not altogether
vindicate Bernanke’s managerialist perspective. William White, a former chief economist of the
Bank for International Settlements, and Claudio Borio, who still works there (both cited
approvingly by Chancellor) have indeed given us sobering and sometimes prescient warnings about
the financial risks that have built up.

The fundamental problem is that we have two objectives for policy: stabilising the real economy in
the short to medium term and containing financial risks. One cannot hit two goals with one
instrument. The choices are either to split the focus of monetary policy between the two goals in
some way or to employ other instruments, such as regulation (for managing finance) or fiscal
policy (for managing demand).
The efficacy of the first, sometimes called “leaning against the wind”, is unclear. Moderate rises in
interest rates might even have given us the worst of both worlds — both deflation and persistent
financial froth. Yet tighter regulation, though necessary, will create opportunities for arbitrage, as
motivated players find ways around it. At the same time, governments have not used active fiscal
policy well, which suggests that monetary policy will still be needed to steer the economy.

Appearances deceive
Real short-term interest rates in the UK are not so low by historical standards
Nominal rate (%)

Real rate, less inflation* (%)

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20
1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

More immediately, the question is whether today’s high inflation presages a fundamental shift in
the monetary policy environment from one of low inflation to something more like the 1970s.
Already, the most recent Fed policy review, with its rear-view mirror focus on the average of past
inflation rates, is hopelessly out of date. Yet how far the shocks of the past two and a half years
have durably altered the policy environment is unclear.
Bernanke is right: quantitative easing in response to

The perfect solution to
monetary policy is the holy grail
of central banking. But, like the
grail, it is unlikely ever to be
found

the “Great Recession” did not create the
hyperinflation against which so many mistakenly
warned. The mistake over inflation was more recent,
more understandable and more modest. It consisted
of not recognising soon enough the scale of the surge
in the supply of broad money in 2020 in response to
the Covid-19 crisis, the pervasiveness of supply

disruptions and the strength of the recovery.
The perfect solution to monetary policy is the holy grail of central banking. But, like the grail, it is
unlikely ever to be found. At the same time, the public is not going to accept a return to 19thcentury US capitalism, without even central banks. We will continue to manage money and
finance, not return to the gold standard or embrace bitcoin and its rivals as the solutions.
Today, the inflation targeting supported by Bernanke looks the least bad approach. But the
question also remains how best to contain the financial risks emphasised by Chancellor. The
biggest concern, we know, is the tendency towards incontinent expansion of credit and so also of
debt. Regulation is a part of the solution. But the most important structural source of excessive
leverage is the tax deductibility of interest. We should eliminate that now.
21st Century Monetary Policy: The Federal Reserve from the Great Inflation to Covid19 by Ben Bernanke, Norton $35/£24.99, 512 pages
The Price of Time: The Real Story of Interest by Edward Chancellor, Allen Lane £25, 432
pages
Martin Wolf is the FT’s chief economics commentator

Join our online book group on Facebook at FT Books Café
Letter in response to this article:
Money as a machine is not just extraordinary — it has a soul / From Konstantinos Gravas,
Lecturer, Department of Banking and Financial Management, University of Piraeus, Athens,
Greece

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
Covid-19
Economics books
Central banks
Monetary policy

