FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Unhedged

Jay Powell is no dove
And how the yield curve might be wrong

ROBERT ARMSTRONG

© Financial Times

Robert Armstrong and Ethan Wu
Published DEC 1 2022

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
This article is an on-site version of our Unhedged newsletter. Sign up here to get the newsletter
sent straight to your inbox every weekday

Good morning. Yesterday’s letter mentioned the surprising resilience of China’s manufacture and
export machine in the face of zero-Covid policies. Just as we pressed send, the latest PMI
manufacturing survey for China landed and, naturally, showed a bigger-than-expected decline. Are
things worse than we knew? Email us: robert.armstrong@ft.com & ethan.wu@ft.com.

What Powell said
Jay Powell said one new thing in yesterday’s speech: an as-clear-as-they-come hint that the Fed
will raise interest rates by 50 basis points instead of 75 at this month’s meeting. In the same dovish
vein, the Fed chair nodded to the fact that “my colleagues and I do not want to overtighten”. Stocks
staged a 3 per cent rally.
But those marginally dovish remarks were tucked into a speech that, overall, was not bursting with
optimism. Remember that a 50bp rate increase in December was already the odds-on favourite
before Powell opened his mouth. Moreover, Powell made sure to downplay the importance of
pacing of rates, as he did at last month’s meeting. What matters more than how fast rates rise, he
reiterated, is the level at which they stop and how long they stay there. This is pretty unambiguous:

Cutting rates is something we don’t want to do soon, so that’s why we are
slowing down.
He doesn’t want to cut rates anytime soon for the simple reason that inflation generally remains
very high, though it is cooling a bit in some areas. So what would change Powell’s mind? He
handed us three conditions yesterday:

1 Core goods prices need to keep falling.
2 CPI and PCE housing inflation need to follow private rent indices down.
3 Ex-housing core services inflation needs to fall decisively.

The first two conditions are just a matter of what is expected to happen happening. But the third
condition, Powell insisted, hangs on how fast the labour market cools off:

Finally, we come to core services other than housing . . . this may be the most
important category for understanding the future evolution of core inflation.
Because wages make up the largest cost in delivering these services, the
labour market holds the key to understanding inflation in this category . . .
Not everyone agrees that core services ex-housing inflation is all about wages. Some specialists
emphasise the role of wages in driving shelter inflation, but not necessarily in other categories. The
chart of CPI inflation below illustrates the point. As we’ve discussed several times, this year’s jump
in services prices came mostly from three areas — shelter (due to wages), medical care (largely due
to a statistical quirk) and transportation (due to pent-up demand and pricey fuel). Strip those out
and services inflation looks much tamer (chart courtesy of Omair Sharif at Inflation Insights):

Whether Powell is right about what drives inflation, markets will care about what he cares about,
and he was plain that wage growth needs to fall and the labour market needs to weaken. Those are
not the words of an inflation dove, nor of a man scared to risk a recession. (Ethan Wu)

Three ways the yield curve could be wrong
Compared with the stock market, which did a giddy little dance, the Treasury market responded to
Powell’s comments with aplomb. Three-month yields were unchanged; two-year yields fell by a
meaty 16 basis points, but 10-year yields fell by only five. In other words, Powell’s definitive
message that rate increases will now proceed in half-percentage-point increments brought the
medium-term outlook for policy rates down, but left the bigger picture looking a lot like it did
before.
The big picture is that the yield curve, however you like to measure it, is as inverted as it has been
in a very long time. For macroeconomic purposes, Unhedged likes to look at the 10-year/threemonth curve. Here’s a chart:

The 10-year/two-year is even more inverted. All this has grabbed headlines this week. Here’s The
Wall Street Journal on Tuesday:

Last week, the yield on the 10-year US Treasury note dropped to 0.78
percentage point below that of the two-year yield, the largest negative gap
since late 1981, at the start of a recession that pushed the unemployment rate
even higher than it would later reach in the 2008 financial crisis.
Still, many investors and analysts see reasons to think that the current yield
curve may presage waning inflation and a return to a more normal economy,
rather than an approaching economic disaster.

The current yield curve is “the market saying: I think inflation is going to
come down,” said Gene Tannuzzo, global head of fixed income at the asset
management firm Columbia Threadneedle … investors, he added, believe
“the Fed does have credibility. Ultimately the Fed will win this inflation
fight.”
Curve inversions are such reliable recession indicators (as the chart above shows) because longterm rates are determined by the market and are as such a very rough approximation of the
equilibrium rate of interest for the economy. When the Fed pushes short-term rates above longterm rates, it is creating a significant drag on growth, increasing the odds of outright recession. The
WSJ piece, however, is suggesting that the depth of the current inversion is, in part, a good sign:
long rates are as low as they are because the market thinks the Fed will bring down inflation before
too long.
But it’s not that much of a good sign: if the very credible Fed brings down inflation by causing a
very credible recession, that will hurt. But might the yield curve be sending a false recession signal
this time? There are two ways this could be true.
The first way is the “soft landing” view, or as we like to call it, “Waller’s dream”, after Fed governor
Christopher Waller. He thinks that policy tightening could eliminate job openings, but not jobs,
bringing the labour market into balance, slowing wages and bringing inflation to target. We have
no idea how that would work. Chair Powell said yesterday that inflation could be controlled with
“unemployment going up a bit but not really spiking”. That seems mighty tricky, too.
The second way the yield curve could be wrong is if the Fed is not a total hard-ass about inflation
getting all the way to its official inflation target before starting to lower rates. Suppose that, instead
of waiting for inflation to get to 2 per cent, the Fed began to ease with inflation in, say, the high 3’s
— hoping to stave off a recession as growth falters. That would make it much more likely that a
recession could be avoided.

Rick Rieder of BlackRock told us on Tuesday that something like this is his base case: “I think soft
landing is very likely as long as the Fed doesn’t feel like it has to over tighten. Two-thirds of the
economy is services and is not that rate-sensitive. You keep hammering at housing and auto
finance, you are just creating more risk.” He thinks the Fed will pause rate increases relatively
soon. For a pause (which is not to say a cut) “approaching the target over the medium term will be
sufficient”.
The economist Olivier Blanchard argued in the FT this week that an inflation target of 3 per cent or
so might be a good idea, as it would give monetary policy “more room to operate,” while at the
same time not scaring everyone that central banks will let inflation get out of control. He writes:

I suspect that when, in 2023 or 2024, inflation is back down to 3 per cent,
there will be an intense debate about whether it is worth getting it down to 2
per cent if it comes at the cost of a further substantial slowdown in activity. I
would be surprised if central banks officially moved the target, but they
might decide to stay higher than it for some time and maybe, eventually,
revise it.
The Rieder/Blanchard picture is much more plausible than Waller’s tales of rate increases
surgically excising job openings without touching jobs.
Of course, one must mention the third, opposite way that the yield curve could be wrong: long rates
may be too low because the market is systematically underestimating how high rates will have to
be, and how long, to stamp out inflation. In that case, the curve’s recession warnings are only
wrong in that they are not loud enough.

One good read
A former VP at Amazon Web Services on the company’s attempts to make blockchain useful: “I’m
not prepared to say that no blockchain-based system will ever be useful for anything. But I’m
gonna stay negative until I see one actually at work doing something useful, without number-go-up
greedheads clamped on its teats.”

Recommended newsletters for you
Cryptofinance — Scott Chipolina filters out the noise of the global cryptocurrency industry.
Sign up here
Swamp Notes — Expert insight on the intersection of money and power in US politics. Sign up
here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Robert Armstrong
Unhedged
US inflation
Markets
Federal Reserve

