FT PROFESSIONAL

Alphaville Global Economy

Financial instability wants its money back
Are price and financial stability fundamentally opposed?

It’s a tough balancing act between financial and price stability © CC @Mohamed Hassan

Edward Price
Published OCT 18 2022

Edward Price is principal at Ergo Consulting. A former British trade official, he also teaches at
New York University’s Center for Global Affairs.
As the Great Accommodation gives way to the Great Uh-Oh, here’s the problem central bankers
face: whither the policy rate?

Right now, the answer is easy. Up. Jay Powell is warning of “pain” and “unfortunate costs” for
households and companies. Andrew Bailey says the Bank of England “will not hesitate to raise
interest rates”. Christine Lagarde said the ECB “will do what we have to do, which is to continue
hiking interest rates”.
Higher rates, however, will eventually spell recession, illiquidity and insolvency. That may
challenge financial stability. If so — if crisis ensues — only a lower policy rate will do. Alas, lower
rates exacerbate upward price pressures. After the “transitory inflation” snafu, swinging back to
accommodation would cost central banks their remaining street cred. Under these circumstances
their only option would be . . . a higher policy rate.
Whatever central banks do, is financial instability the ultimate threat?
Well yes, but don’t ask me. Ask the people in charge. Four economists from the New York Fed have
recently released a revised version of a 2020 paper entitled The Financial (In)Stability Real
Interest Rate, R**.
And what, pray tell, is r-star-star? Again, easy. If r-star is the natural real rate of interest
associated with macroeconomic stability (caveat emptor), then r-star-star is the rate associated
with financial stability. Cool. You can watch the paper being presented at a recent Fed event here.
It’s engrossing.
Spoiler alert though. There’s a major catch.

Both conceptually and observationally r** differs from the “natural real
interest rate” and from the observed real interest rate reflecting a tension in
terms of macroeconomic stabilization versus financial stability objectives.
Great. Financial stability ≠ macroeconomic stability. R-star ≠ r-star-star. Moreover, the two part
ways just when it matters most — a financial crisis (basically, whenever banking hits the wall).
Behold these graphs:

This is a crisis model we’re talking about, so meanwhile GDP and investment fall while credit
spreads rise. That’s any crunch.

But here’s the thing: prices. You can’t reconcile these graphs with a lower policy rate. US inflation
came in at 8.2 per cent in September. Oof.
We’re already seeing this tension play out. To choke inflation, American business leaders expect
the Fed to spank labour. Bank of America expects a 5.5 per cent unemployment rate. Frankly, as
Larry Summers has suggested, over 6 per cent wouldn’t be weird.

Lawrence H. Summers
@LHSummers · Follow

Consensus has now moved to the view a recession is likely
next yr. The avg recession involves a 3% point increase in
unemployment. The most benign involved an extra 1.5 %
unemployment. Fed forecast of 4.5 peak is looking
implausible. 6 seems a better guess

wsj.com
Economists Now Expect a Recession, Job Losses by Next Year
The majority of surveyed economists think the Federal Reserve will
start cutting rates in late 2023 or early 2024.
9:01 PM · Oct 16, 2022
345

Reply

Copy link
Read 39 replies

So, the price mechanism and households (occasionally) need different interest rates. Full
employment and price stability are (occasionally) at odds. Financial instability, meanwhile, will
happily challenge both.
Basically, there are conditions under which the dual mandate (alias: internal equilibrium) must
take a back seat to capital markets (alias: global equilibrium). As per the paper:

. . . “Greenspan’s put” . . . has been a feature of all financial stress episodes in
the US [since the 1970s], with the only exception being the later part of the
Great Financial Crisis . . . [in] general we note that financial stress episodes
are associated with periods in which the real interest rate is above our
measure of r**.
Translation: financial markets want their policy cut. Otherwise, they’re gonna pay you a little visit.

And when they do, you can forget whatever fed funds rate you think is appropriate for full
employment and/or price stability.
Bravo to the NY Fed. This paper has, in all fairness, explained exactly what it is that financial
instability does.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Global Economy
US interest rates
Central banks
Federal Reserve
Alphaville

