FT PROFESSIONAL

UK interest rates

BoE signals ‘modest tightening’ of monetary policy in next 2 years
Interest rates likely to rise sooner than anticipated as inflation climbs towards 4%

The Bank of England will continue its £150bn programme of purchases of government debt until the end of the year © Bloomberg

Chris Giles in London
Published AUG 5 2021 | Updated AUG 5 2021, 08:29

The Bank of England has said “some modest tightening of monetary policy is likely to be necessary”
over the next two years to keep inflation under control.
In a hawkish change in the stance of the central bank’s Monetary Policy Committee, a majority of
its eight members indicated at their meeting that ended on Thursday that they thought the
economic conditions had been met to allow it to start discussing raising interest rates again.
With economists now expecting the first rise in UK interest rates next year, the move suggests the
BoE will begin to normalise monetary policy faster than the European Central Bank and US
Federal Reserve.

The bank’s move came in response to its new forecasts showing that inflation was likely to rise to 4
per cent towards the end of this year, compared with a previous forecast of only 2.5 per cent, and
there would be excess demand for much of the next year.
Andrew Bailey, BoE governor, said he thought the economic recovery from coronavirus would be
“bumpy” and the period of high inflation would be “temporary”, but it was right to change the
committee’s guidance because “the MPC takes the risk of persistently higher inflation very
seriously”.
Krishna Guha, vice-chair of Evercore ISI, said the BoE “has come out more hawkish than expected,
starting to build the case for tightening over the medium term in spite of near-term disruption
from the Delta variant of the virus, which it assessed would have only a ‘slightly negative’ impact on
third-quarter growth”.
Despite the change in guidance, sterling was little changed in afternoon trading, barely rising
against the US dollar at $1.392.
The MPC made it clear there was no urgency among MPC members for immediate action to raise
interest rates. The committee voted seven to one to continue the £150bn programme of purchases
of government debt until the end of the year and unanimously to keep interest rates at the historic
low of 0.1 per cent.
Bailey said the MPC would take care not to put “undue weight” on evidence that there might be
temporarily too much demand raising inflation as the economy and spending patterns returned to
normal after the pandemic.
The BoE said it thought most of the rise in inflation was still “transitory” and the rate of price
growth would fall sharply next year because energy prices would not rise further and supply
bottlenecks in semiconductors and other goods were likely to ease.
The BoE’s forecasts showed only very gradual interest rate rises were likely to be necessary to keep
inflation close to its medium-term target of 2 per cent, with the first increase to about 0.25 per cent
likely to come next year before rates reach 0.5 per cent in 2024.

But this was faster than previously expected by economists. Allan Monks, UK economist at
JPMorgan, said the comments and new forecasts were “a signal the BoE is leaning more towards a
late 2022 hike”.
In a further clarification of its longer-term strategy for tightening monetary policy, the BoE
announced that its first move would be to raise interest rates until they were 0.5 per cent and, once
at that level, it would no longer reinvest the proceeds of the £875bn of government bonds it holds
once they matured. Previously, it said it would not start to unwind quantitative easing until rates
had reached 1.5 per cent.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
UK banks
Banks
UK economy
UK inflation
UK quantitative easing

