FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Unhedged

Pressure on the Fed
More on why the central bank’s balance sheet is likely to grow again, and soon

ROBERT ARMSTRONG

© Reuters

Robert Armstrong
Published NOV 7 2025

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
This article is an on-site version of our Unhedged newsletter. Premium subscribers can sign up
here to get the newsletter delivered every weekday. Standard subscribers can upgrade to
Premium here, or explore all FT newsletters

Good morning. Yesterday the outplacement firm Challenger, Gray & Christmas released its lay-off
report for October. It found that companies announced 153,000 cuts last month, 175 per cent more
than in October 2024. But the number of announced lay-offs and the number of lay-offs are two
different things. We have good reason — in the form of initial jobless claims, which are stable — to
think that lay-offs are not leaping higher. So we have a puzzle: why is the increase in lay-off
announcements outrunning the increase in lay-offs? Send solutions to unhedged@ft.com.

The fed balance sheet, again
Yesterday Unhedged discussed the views of Joseph Wang, one of several voices arguing that the
Fed will soon have to increase the size of its balance sheet. Massive deficits funded with short-term
debt require the Treasury’s bank account (the Treasury general account) to grow. This expansion
sucks cash (or, if you prefer, “liquidity”) out of the financial system. Scarce liquidity, in turn, forces
short-term interest rates up — potentially wresting control of monetary policy from the Federal
Reserve. Wang thinks that the Fed will shortly have to intervene in the money markets directly, as
it did in 2019 and 2020, buying Treasury bills to push cash into the system.
This is tricky stuff. Like Bayesian statistics or the NFL’s eligible receiver rule, money market
mechanics seem clear when you focus on them, but instantly become confusing again as soon as
your mind wanders. So I thought we might take another look at the issue, from another angle; the
topic may become quite important for market watchers in the coming months.
There are, I am sorry to say, five different short-term interest rates to keep track of here. They are:

The standing repo facility rate (SRF): This is the rate at which the Fed
will lend with Treasury securities as collateral. When the Fed does these
loans — taking securities, handing out cash — financial system liquidity
increases. In theory, the SRF is a “ceiling” for short-term rates, because
borrowers will not want to borrow at a more expensive rate than the one the
Fed offers. The facility was tapped last week for the first time in a long time,
including for $50bn on Halloween (boo!). This got everyone talking about
liquidity problems in money markets.
Interest rate on reserve balances (IORB): This is the interest rate
that the Fed pays on reserves that banks deposit with it. As a monetary tool,
it works by controlling banks’ opportunity cost for lending. If the IORB is
lowered, banks will lend more in short-term markets, because they earn
less simply parking reserves with the Fed. More bank lending lowers rates
and increases liquidity in the system.
Fed funds rate (FFR): This is the rate at which banks lend to each other
overnight without collateral, and the rate the Fed officially targets. But it is
increasingly irrelevant. Daily FFR lending volume is less than $100bn.
SOFR volumes (see below) are 30 times higher.
Overnight reverse repurchase rate (RRP): This is the rate at which
Fed will borrow, using securities as collateral. Such borrowing absorbs
liquidity, and the RRP is a “floor” in the sense that no one would lend below
it. There is essentially no borrowing at this rate now, because short rates
are squeezed up against the ceiling, not squished to the floor.

Secured overnight financing rate (SOFR): a market rate at which
institutions borrow from one another short term with Treasury securities as
collateral. While the Fed does not officially target this rate, it’s the one that
matters most, and you can be sure the Fed watches it very closely indeed.
Below is a graph of the five rates over the past year (it was inspired by a similar one drawn by Vítor
Constâncio, former vice-president of the European Central Bank, on his Substack; more from
Constâncio shortly).

The chart shows the tightness of short-term lending markets. The most important rate, SOFR, has
been pulling away from the Fed’s target, occasionally breaking above IORB, and even climbing
above the SRF rate. This is the Fed, at the margin, losing control of monetary policy as cash
becomes scarce. The recent reduction in the IORB and the SRF have brought SOFR down, but the
fight may not be over. (Why the SRF sometimes fails to work as a ceiling is a complex question, but
seems to mostly stem from the capital charges associated with Fed repo).

Constâncio’s view of why the Fed has to worry about SOFR spikes differs from Wang’s. Wang
thinks it’s about monetary control. Constâncio’s view (in which he is hardly alone) is that the
problem is that if short rates rise and become more volatile, a crucial buyer of Treasury securities
— hedge funds engaging in leveraged basis trades — will become forced sellers, causing a proper
market mess.
Basis traders buy Treasuries and short Treasury futures, and profit when the difference in the
prices (the “basis”) closes. Constâncio refers to a now famous recent Fed paper that found that
hedge funds domiciled in the Cayman Islands were actually the largest foreign holders of Treasury
securities, bigger than China or Japan. If high, volatile SOFR blows the hedgies out of their trades,
it will be ugly.
Constâncio does not think this is going to happen, because he thinks (like Wang) that the Fed will
have to increase its balance sheet again, ensuring “ample reserves”:

With this policy, it is quite easy for the Fed to stabilise liquidity and the
[SOFR] repo rate . . . The fact that it has not done it so far can only be the
result of divergences within the Board [of Fed governors] regarding the
balance sheet size and the adoption of a policy that could be characterised as
quantitative easing. Secretary [Scott] Bessent and some Fed Board members
oppose it for ideological reasons . . . if SOFR remains too high, the Fed will
have to take whatever steps are necessary to avoid the dangerous unwind of
the basis trade. A significant liquidity crisis this time should be unlikely.
This sounds right to me. The stresses in the money market look resolvable. But in any market,
there is always room for surprises and mistakes.

One good read
The sceptics were right.

FT Unhedged podcast
Can’t get enough of Unhedged? Listen to our
new podcast, for a 15-minute dive into the
latest markets news and financial headlines,
twice a week. Catch up on past editions of
the newsletter here.

Recommended newsletters for you
Due Diligence — Top stories from the world of corporate finance. Sign up here
The AI Shift — John Burn-Murdoch and Sarah O’Connor dive into how AI is transforming the
world of work. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Robert Armstrong
Unhedged
Global Economy
US economy
US inflation

