FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion The FT View

A defining moment for central banks
Monetary policymakers grapple with how to chart a path to terminal rates

THE EDITORIAL BOARD

Christine Lagarde of the ECB, Jay Powell of the Fed and Andrew Bailey of the BoE this week indicated that the end of their historic
tightening cycle is in sight © FT Montage: Bloomberg/Getty Images

The editorial board
Published FEB 3 2023

Parsing central bank communications is a hit and miss exercise. Sometimes the chosen language is
a deliberate attempt to guide markets, at other times it is just a slip of the tongue. Clues for when
interest rates will peak, and even start falling, are now key for investment and mortgage decisions.
With inflation seemingly past its peak, this week the Federal Reserve, European Central Bank and
Bank of England indicated that the end of their historic tightening cycle is in sight. They are now at
a defining moment: stop rises too late and deepen this year’s economic slowdown, or too soon and
high prices could become entrenched. The risk of a mistake is high — and right now, their words
are being examined closely.
Although headline inflation is falling, central bankers are still trying to square a number of circles
before ending their rate rises. The improved global growth outlook, pushed up in part by China’s
reopening, will bring some price pressures. In Europe, the fall in natural gas prices will alleviate a
major inflationary force, but it could facilitate more spending. Job markets remain tight too,
adding to wage pressures. Central bankers also need to assess how much prior rate rises are
impacting the economy. Pulling together a convincing narrative of how everything plays out, and
hence what terminal rate is appropriate is tricky — as mixed messages from central bank meetings
this week conveyed.
The Fed slowed the pace of its rate rises to 25 basis points, noting that “ongoing increases” would
be necessary to hit its inflation target. But Fed chair Jay Powell struck a more positive tone at the
subsequent press conference. He said the “disinflationary process” was under way and did not push
back against markets, which had priced in a lower peak in interest rates and even cuts later in the
year. Indeed, although the Fed’s preferred measure of underlying price pressures eased further, job
numbers rose unexpectedly on Friday, leading to a sell off in markets.
The eurozone is further behind in its inflation battle. The ECB raised rates by another 50 bps and
committed to increasing by the same amount in March. President Christine Lagarde doubled
down, saying “we have ground to cover”. After all, annual core inflation growth — which excludes
food and energy — remains stubbornly high. Yet the bank’s statement contained softeners,
conveying “more balanced” risks to the inflation outlook and ambiguity on what happens after
March.

The BoE also raised rates by 50 bps, ditching language that it would need to act “forcefully”, and
forecast inflation to drop below target in 2024. This points to an imminent end to its rate rises. Yet
the meeting minutes noted inflation risks are “skewed significantly to the upside”.
Amid the nuances, markets were not convinced about central bankers’ plans. Despite the rate rises,
and scope for more ahead, investors chose to hear a dovish message and initially scaled back
expectations of further central bank rises. In the direct aftermath, equities and bonds soared,
building on a rally over easing price pressures since the start of the year. This has loosened
financial conditions, which is itself inflationary — further complicating central banks’ task. If
inflation proves more persistent, and rates need to go higher, investors will be in for a nasty
repricing.
Central banks’ recent slowing of rate rises makes sense to better calibrate the peak rate as new data
comes in. A sustained easing in core inflation and wage pressure may next persuade them to stop
decisively. Clearer communication will also be more important, just as rate setting becomes ever
more delicate in this rate cycle’s final stretch. But this will be challenging until central bankers can
pierce through the uncertainty with more convincing forecasts.
Letters in response to this editorial comment:
‘Over-hiking’ today is insurance against a nightmare tomorrow / From Richard Barwell, Head of
Macro Research and Investment Strategy, BNP Paribas, London EC2, UK
Another case of confusing inflation with price level / From Carl E Walsh, Distinguished Professor
of Economics Emeritus, University of California, Santa Cruz, CA, US

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
The editorial board

The FT View
Global Economy
US interest rates
Central banks

