FT PROFESSIONAL

Transcript

What is Bidenomics and is it working?
A shift in policy that is changing America and the wider world

Gideon Rachman
Published SEP 21 2023

This is an audio transcript of the Rachman Review podcast episode: ‘What is Bidenomics and is it
working?’
[MUSIC PLAYING]

Gideon Rachman
Hello and welcome to the Rachman Review. I’m Gideon Rachman, chief foreign affairs
commentator of the Financial Times. Our subject this week is Bidenomics. The future of the
American and global economies and President Biden’s chances of re-election may hang on the
success or failure of the super-ambitious industrial and economic policies launched by the Biden
administration. My guest is Brian Deese, who is director of the National Economic Council in the
Biden White House, was a key architect of Bidenomics. He’s now a visiting professor at MIT. So
what are the aims of Bidenomics and is it working?
Joe Biden
Folks, my economic plan is about investing in places and people that have been forgotten. It’s
about making things here in America again. It’s about good jobs. It’s about the dignity of work. And
it’s about damn time we’re doing it.
Gideon Rachman
That was President Joe Biden in a campaign advertisement that gives a strong flavour of the
presidential election campaign that lies ahead over the coming year. But Bidenomics is
controversial, both at home and abroad. Opinion polls suggest that most Americans currently think
the US economy is doing badly and many American allies are concerned that the White House’s
program of subsidies and tariffs to foster American industry will come at their expense. So is
Bidenomics in trouble or is it just getting started? There’s no one better to consult on that subject
than Brian Deese, who was crucial in designing and implementing this radical turn in American
economic policy. I began our conversation by asking Brian Deese about the motivation for
Bidenomics. Is it an attempt to deal with the economic discontents that led to the rise of Donald
Trump?

Brian Deese
Look, I think a big part of the theory and the push behind this whole effort was a view that the
basic trickle-down strategy of focusing on reducing tax rates, reducing regulation, and hoping that
those benefits would flow through left big gaps. Gaps in our economic growth and prosperity, gaps
in the economic geography of the country at big parts of the country feeling left behind. And it also
left decades of deferred maintenance in key drivers of productivity in our economy. Our
infrastructure has fallen way behind other countries, not just physical infrastructure, but our
digital infrastructure, for example, we’re running behind other major economies in terms of
deployment of broadband and other drivers of productivity. And that our country needed a big
infusion of public investment designed to try to unleash private investment and increase our
productive capacity. You know, at core, that was the motivation behind the strategy and it was the
motivation for prioritising infrastructure and doing infrastructure first. You know, we talk a lot
about the Inflation Reduction Act. I’m quite proud of what we were able to do there. But the first
piece of the legislation equivalent in size that we passed was an infrastructure bill really designed
to go at driving productive capacity in that space, but again, using similar tools, using public
investment as the tool.
Gideon Rachman
So clearly some of this was designed to win back Trump voters. But how much continuity do you
think there is with some of what Trump was doing? After all, he talked about the need to reindustrialise America, use the very evocative phrase, American carnage. Biden seems to have taken
that on board and that re-industrialisation is a big game. And also Trump really changed the
dialogue on China. He imposed tariffs on China, which the Biden administration have not
withdrawn. So for all the obvious immense hostility between the two camps, is there continuity
between Biden and Trump?

Brian Deese
I think there’s areas of overlap, but there’s much for difference and there is continuity. I think you
have to break this down between substance and rhetoric. On the substance, the most significant
policies that the Trump administration put in place were the 2017 tax cut and a broad effort to
deregulate industry across the board, whether it was financial services or tech or energy. And in
that sense, the Trump administration’s strategy was more traditionally trickled down. The tax cut,
which is the most significant substantive policy that they put in place, was a $2tn tax cut unpaid
for, designed to try to wait tax cuts to those at the upper end of the spectrum and reduce the
corporate tax rate with the theory that that would increase investment and increase productivity in
the economy. On that substantive score, the Biden administration’s strategy really is a stark break,
sort of a reaction to a trickle-down type approach. Rhetorically, I think that the idea of trying to
bring economic opportunity back to parts of the country that have felt left behind is something
where there is more of a throughline. I think, in practice, part of what has happened in the Biden
administration is actually delivering on things that were talked about a lot in the Trump
administration and fairly in prior administrations, too, but we didn’t actually deliver on. So if you
look at infrastructure, you look at semiconductors, those are things where there was a lot of
discussion and a lot of deliberation and a lot of rhetoric behind the idea that we should do
something about that. I think the key difference in the first two years of the Bush administration is
that there was actual concrete action on those. And in those cases, bipartisan. You know, durable
bipartisan action to try to deliver on infrastructure, deliver on semiconductor. So, look, I think that
there’s a throughline in some important themes, but really big differences in terms of the policy
approach.
Gideon Rachman
So what is Bidenomics?

Brian Deese
Well, look, I think the term has taken on a lot of different elements. To me, it’s a description of
what are the three core economic policy priorities of the Biden administration that have played out
over the course the last two years. The first being prioritising a strong labour market recovery,
which we’ve seen from this crisis. The second being trying to prove out the theory that the US can
actually build a long-term public investment campaign against productive sectors of the economy.
That’s what has been, I call it, at least an industrial strategy. And the third is basically
reinvigorating a historical tradition in the United States of more vigorous competition policy and
enforcement of antitrust laws. Across all three of those, you see a kind of an economic thread
around trying to shape markets and make markets work more effectively for increasing
productivity growth and generating more equitable growth. That’s how I think about it in
substance. And obviously, there’s politics involved, too, but that’s how I think about it.
Gideon Rachman
Let’s talk a little bit about the politics, because described in those terms, it all sounds quite
reasonable, but it’s a big and radical break, isn’t it? With 50 years or 40 years of, let’s say, fair
economics. So why was it felt necessary to do this now?

Brian Deese
Well, I think that the changes in many cases are more of degree than fundamental break, which is
why I describe it the way that I did. The Biden administration’s response to the Covid crisis in
many ways extended the bipartisan responses that came before it. The push around public
investment campaign is in places quite novel, but in other places quite consistent with what many
have tried to get done, like, for example, investment in public infrastructure. But it’s been more
difficult to get it done politically. And the rejuvenation of competition policy is new in the last 30
years, last 40 years, but it’s not new in the last 100 years. So if you look back in the first half of the
last century, it was a big hallmark of American economic policy. So the why now, I think, is because
we have acute immediate crisis. The Covid crisis precipitated a lot of thinking about how to
approach economic policy, but it also revealed longer-term structural challenges the brittleness of
our supply chains, the degree to which geopolitics was shifting, the priority we needed to place on
different economic policies. So I think a lot of these were born out of the crisis. Put together, there
is real ambition in this economic strategy that we haven’t seen in some time.
Gideon Rachman
You talk about industrial strategy, others talk about industrial policy. Those words were pretty
unsayable in the White House, weren’t they? Even 10 years ago when you were working there in
previous administrations? Industrial policy was not really a fashionable idea.

Brian Deese
It was like, I’m reading my kids Harry Potter and it’s like industrial policy was Voldemort, the word
that you cannot say. Look, I talk about an industrial strategy and I choose those words explicitly
because I think it goes to actually understanding what it is that the US has put in place across three
big pieces of legislation: infrastructure, semiconductors and the Inflation Reduction Act. Which
really is a theory about long-term public investment focused on areas of the economy where the
private sector on its own is not gonna generate enough output, enough capacity to meet our
economic and national security goals. And it’s targeted in those three areas, in infrastructure, in
innovation, in microelectronics and in clean energy. Viewed in that way, an industrial strategy,
again, goes back to some of the more historical ways of thinking about that, more Hamiltonian in
terms of the way Hamilton, at the beginning of the founding of our country, laid out the need for an
industrial strategy. I think part of the reason why people have been more hesitant to use the word
industrial policy is it has been used as a way to cast a negative shadow over a broad array of public
investments that are not only necessary but way overdue in our economy. So, yes, it has been out of
favour. Yes, there’s now a big semantic debate around words. I think in the core policies, that’s
what they’re doing. It’s about public investment to try to crowd in private capital in those three
areas.
Gideon Rachman
And how much was this driven by the climate crisis? The sense that the market just wouldn’t
provide the kinds of investments that were necessary?

Brian Deese
Well, I think the climate crisis drove this in two important ways. The first was the recognition of
the market failure that you described, which is very clear. And it’s been screaming out increasingly
that the market on its own is not going to actually meet sufficient supply of zero carbon energy that
the world needs. But the second way was that we have been focused for many years in climate
policy around a strategy about how to make pollution more expensive, and that that was seen as an
elegant way of trying to address the climate crisis. There is another strategy which is about making
zero carbon technologies cheaper. And we determined that the political economy in the United
States was such that the only way we could meet the level of ambition that we need to address the
climate crisis, was to focus on a strategy to try to make zero carbon technologies cheap as quickly
as possible. And so that is a lot of the theory behind the Inflation Reduction Act to try to use public
investment to drive down the cost of deployable clean energy technology. And yes, the urgency of
that and the scale necessary is a big part of this strategy itself.
Gideon Rachman
So do you think the Inflation Reduction Act was actually a bad name? I think Biden has suggested
as such and others have said, well, this was basically a climate bill which was dressed up as an
inflation bill.
Brian Deese
Well, look, the Inflation Reduction Act had multiple components. We don’t talk about the reforms
in prescription drug pricing that are gonna help to reduce spending in Medicare. We don’t talk
about the reform to the US corporate tax system to establish a 15 per cent minimum tax and to tax
companies based on their book income not their tax income. Those are important reforms and
those are reforms that were designed to try to lower spending and increase tax revenue in the US
economy. But those were connected together with the clean energy pieces of the Inflation
Reduction Act, which on its own should be described as the most significant effort in the United
States ever to combat climate change by investing in driving down the cost of clean energy
technologies. You know, as often is the case, we tried to accomplish multiple things in an individual
piece of legislation. But if we’re talking about the clean energy components, then, yeah, that’s what
it was about.

Gideon Rachman
And how much effect do you think you’re having? I mean, you’ve got a single term. It’s a big piece
of legislation and the Chips Act as well. Can you see the effects already coming through?
Brian Deese
So look, if you look at clean energy, for example, and this is an issue that now at MIT, I’m looking
at closely. We just launched this past week a tool that allows us to measure with more precision in
real time, clean energy investment in the US economy. So what do we know so far in the last year,
through the end of the second quarter of 2023, we saw $213bn of clean energy investment in the
US economy. Importantly, that’s not announced investment. That’s not a company putting out a
press release saying, I will invest $5bn. That’s actual investment. That’s up about 35 per cent from
the year before. It’s up 165 per cent from five years earlier. So I think what we’re seeing initially is
quite positive, a significant private sector response to these incentives. I think the same is largely
true on the microelectronics side as well. So initial results are quite positive in terms of the private
sector response. That’s not dispositive, though, in part because we need to make sure that we could
actually build to scale in the United States. And there are some big challenges to do so in practical
terms. But coming out of the gate one year in, I think we’re operating at the high end of
expectations and now we’ve got to deliver.
Gideon Rachman
Biden is clearly campaigning on using his economic record. He’s very proud of it. The Biden-Harris
ads major on Bidenomics. He’s adopted the term even though initially it was used by his
opponents. But if you look at the opinion polls, it doesn’t seem to be cutting through. Most
Americans seem to think the economy is not doing well. How do you explain that?
Brian Deese
Well, look, I would offer a couple of thoughts. The first is there’s an increasing partisan skew in
polling in the US, which you can see on a number of issues, and so you do have to break that down.
But underneath, I think that everything that is happening in the economy today, we do need to
view through the fact of what has happened to families and what has happened to people’s lived
economic circumstances over the course of last couple of years.

And of course, the principal thing that has defined the way people live and work and operate is not
the policy improvements that we’ve put in place, because those largely are just in the beginning
stages of actually being felt. The principal driver has been this complete shock to the system of
Covid and upsetting every part of how people live and work. And then this burst of historically high
inflation, which created instability and pushed real incomes into the negative category for a period
of time. Now we’re coming out of that process, and I think most optimistically, real incomes for
typical working people in the United States have turned positive now for more than a year.
And so I believe that as that happens and as the investment campaign begins to more clearly show
fruit across time, that people will understand and see that and respond to that. But that is going to
take some time. So that political calendar operates in a way where everything is rushed. And so
there will be a lot of focus on this question of, you know, does this approach deliver dividends in
the immediate term? I’m optimistic that it will. But the most important impacts of this strategy are
going to be felt in communities across the country in terms of our economy’s capacity over multiple
years.
Gideon Rachman
I mean, you’re not a political strategist. It’s not your department. But that must be making the
Biden team in the White House bite their nails a little bit because they’ve got 15 months to turn this
around. So they need the economic effects to be felt. Although, as you suggested, this partisanship
effect is very interesting, isn’t it? I mean, basically, Democrats think the economy is doing well and
Republicans just don’t.
Brian Deese
Yeah. Look, I mean, I’m not dismissing that people’s lived experiences have made them anxious
and uncertain about the economy for sure. Looking at polling and looking at aggregated polling
questions without actually unpacking them and provide noise versus signal, and that is because our
politics has gotten much more skewed on almost any really salient issue. You see an increasing
skew between Democrats and Republicans. And so part of what I try to do to answer that question,
which I think is a fair question and one that obviously anyone involved in US politics is gonna pay
close attention to, is to try to unpack and look at how our Democrats, how our independents
responding to economic circumstances.

One fascinating thing I would say, by the way, is if you look at Democrats and independent voters
and you ask them about their own individual personal financial circumstances, their responses are
positive, more positive than in many cases pre the pandemic. If you ask about the overall economy,
you get more muted response. You know, that also is, I think, an indication that part of what is
going on here is that the uncertainty associated with the Covid pandemic and with the burst of
inflation has created a sense of uncertainty in the aggregate, even as many people are feeling more
secure in their own individual economic circumstances.
Gideon Rachman
Turning to the global picture, as you well know, a lot of the reaction even among American allies to
the big subsidies that were announced for EVs, electric vehicles and chips and so on was dismay
because they said, you know, America is gonna suck all these jobs into the United States and this is
gonna disrupt the global trading system. Were you at all surprised by that reaction? And how did
you try to respond?
Brian Deese
I was a bit surprised with the European reaction, in part because I think it reflected a missed
opportunity. Because at core, to your point, even if the name wasn’t the best way of capturing this,
what the Inflation Reduction Act actually was, its most important element, was the United States,
after multiple decades of trying and failing to step up and step into leadership in the global fight
against climate change, the United States actually doing so in a big way. And I would say going
back decades, my conversations with European counterparts, including when we were working to
try to get the Paris Agreement done, was a hope and an urging of the United States to get into the
climate game and an understanding that when the United States did, it would be with an American
approach and an American strategy, and it would not look like the way that other countries or
jurisdictions was doing.

And so having done that in the Inflation Reduction Act, I think there was a missed opportunity to
say, OK, this is historic progress because the United States is now leading in the fight against
climate change. Now we have to work to make sure that this works for the world and importantly
works for the global south. I think we have now moved the conversation more productively in that
direction. I think some of the reaction last fall was around parts of the Inflation Reduction Act that
substantively are smaller but were politically salient, like the consumer subsidies for electric
vehicles, when in fact that provision, for example, is not by any stretch of the imagination the most
meaningful fiscally or the most meaningful in terms of addressing climate change. But it took on a
certain, you know, political resonance.
So I was a bit surprised, but I am heartened by the fact that I think we’ve now moved through some
of the stages of working on that. And I think we are getting now closer to what should be the real
focus, which is the Inflation Reduction Act is necessary but not sufficient to make sure that as we
drive down the cost of zero-carbon technologies, that those technologies are available to deploy in
large emitting emerging markets. We have to make sure that we build a system where that
happens, if we want to address climate change and if we want to address American economic and
national security.
Gideon Rachman
You mentioned national security. So how much, again, is competition with China, both
economically but strategically behind the whole approach?
Brian Deese
Look, I think that you can’t build an economic strategy and an economic growth strategy in
isolation without a recognition of the way in which the global economy has changed as China has
grown and the approach that China has taken to growth over the course of the last couple of
decades. And I do think that if you look at our industrial strategy, not just in the IRA, by the way,
across how we’ve done infrastructure and how we’ve done semiconductors, it reflects a more
realistic view of the reality that China is a major player in the global economy and that they operate
according to an economic strategy and using a set of tools that are distinct.

And so we can’t hold the global economy as a stylised, free market economy, design our policies in
a certain way, and then look back and say we didn’t get the results that we wanted because China
was operating using different tools. We have to start from the reality of where we are today and
then build a strategy that’s durable to that. So China is in focus. But I also think that some of the
criticisms of our approach have missed the fact that China is not the principal and dominant
reason why we’re doing what we’re doing. We’re doing what we’re doing to build a durable
economic growth strategy for the United States, doing so clear-eyed about the role of China in the
global economy, not because of China.
Gideon Rachman
So next week in the series we’re gonna do on Bidenomics, we’re talking to Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala of
the World Trade Organization. One of the points she made to me is that, yes, there are signs now
that Europe is also taking, if you like, a more Biden-like approach, putting money subsidies into
chips and EVs and so on. But that she fears that the real losers will be the poorest countries in the
world, which absolutely cannot compete in a subsidy race, and that that will have a distorting
effect. What’s your response to that?
Brian Deese
The Inflation Reduction Act provides the best opportunity that we have had in decades to actually
credibly address the climate crisis. And nothing is more important for economies in the global
south that are bearing the brunt of the climate crisis more than having a durable strategy to do so.
By driving down the cost of deployable technologies. The IRA provides the potential to really be a
game-changer in helping those economies transition more effectively and more equitably. It is
necessary, but it is not sufficient.

And so what I would say is that I share the concerns, which is why I think our focus, collective
focus, in the United States, in multilateral fora, needs to be on how do you now build the necessary
capabilities to make sure that that’s the case. And I think that reforming our multilateral
institutions and having our institutions, including the World Bank, be much more ambitious about
being a bridge of providing financing so that when we have deployable technologies, we can deploy
them at scale in emerging-market economies is incredibly critical. I think that’s behind what you
saw happening at the G20 with some of the Biden administration’s policies to that effect. I think
that that is doable. And absolutely, I think, there are risks, but I end where I start, which is we need
as a global community a very ambitious and credible strategy to fight the climate crisis.
And this, I think, is a better opportunity than we’ve had in some time. But we need to finish that
piece of the task by saying how do we make sure that when we’re using public investment in the
United States to drive down the cost of technologies, the goal is not to be very clear to do so, and
then to build a wall around the United States where that technology is not deployed in other
jurisdictions. You saw, for example, President Biden and Prime Minister Modi at the G20 explicitly
saying we need to build partnerships so that we can transfer zero carbon technology more
effectively into the Indian economy. We need to do more of that and we need to credibly put
resources behind that effort.
Gideon Rachman
Last question. I mean, as you said, there’s been a kind of ideological shift, a general belief that if
you want to call it trickle-down economics, that that hasn’t worked — and as a result, a
rehabilitation of industrial strategy. But there are, as you know, critics still out there saying
industrial strategy has a very bad record. Industrial policy is picking winners, that governments
aren’t good at doing that, that you’ll waste a huge amount of money through subsidies. That
favouring localism over global production is a misbegotten idea. Are you convinced that this is all
gonna work?

Brian Deese
There are a lot of things that keep me up at night for sure. And every strategy has risks. I think we
need to be very humble about the ways in which targeted industrial policies in the past have not
achieved their objectives. But I also think some of the concerns create a straw man that you
actually look at the substance of the Biden administration’s policies don’t actually operate.
So the goal of this policy is not self-sufficiency or putting the US on the island. The goal is to
achieve more diversification and resilience. The goal is not to have the government doling out
subsidy to individual companies based on favoured terms. It’s to provide stable public investment
incentives to try to build private capacity in areas where we have fallen behind, to include
infrastructure, to include research and development, to include areas where there has been less
debate in the past, but there has been less success in actually driving policy outcomes, in part
because this idea that any time the government gets involved, it actually slows rather than extends
economic opportunity has actually cast a shadow over a number of policies that we need to push as
a country.
So, you know, that’s why I do think that looking at this industrial strategy as not a, you know,
fundamental ideological break, but a rejuvenation of a set of strategies that the US has used to
great effect in the past. If you look back, whether it’s in the 1950s and the 1960s or other historical
periods, we have used these approaches to great effect. We need to be humble about the ways in
which they can go wrong. But I am fundamentally optimistic and convinced that this can be a very
effective and a very durable economic strategy for the country.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Gideon Rachman
That was Brian Deese, the former director of the National Economic Council in the Biden White
House, ending this edition of The Rachman Review. And we’ll be continuing on this topic next
week and the week after. Next week, I interview Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, the director-general of the
World Trade Organization. So please join me again for another edition of the Rachman Review.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

