FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion The FT View

Jay Powell’s rate cut conundrum
With inflation down and the jobs market cooling, the economics points to 50bp

THE EDITORIAL BOARD

Jay Powell, chair of the Federal Reserve, which will discuss whether to cut rates at its meeting this week. He can only act on what he
knows now and should continue to ignore politics © Al Drago/Bloomberg

The editorial board
Published SEP 15 2024

In times of uncertainty, central bankers have often invoked the “Brainard conservatism principle”.
Coined by economist William Brainard in 1967, it recommends that when monetary policymakers
are unsure of the effects of their interest rate policies, they ought to react by less than they would
with greater certainty. As the US Federal Reserve discusses whether to initiate the rate-cutting
cycle with a reduction of 25 or 50 basis points at its meeting this week, the principle would appear
to give a clear answer.

But caution is less relevant when the balance of risks to the Fed’s dual mandate — to achieve 2 per
cent inflation, and support employment — are uneven. That may now be the case. The August
consumer price index data showed annual price growth falling to just 2.5 per cent, in line with the
Fed’s preferred PCE measure. The jobs market, however, is cooling rapidly. Non-farm payroll
numbers have been revised down over the summer, the jobs opening rate is back near prepandemic levels and small business hiring plans are subdued.

Put simply, the risk of over-constraining the American jobs market seems to be greater than the
risk of US inflationary pressures reviving again. High rates are sapping demand, and while
significant lay-offs have not occurred yet, they often spiral when they do arise as rising
unemployment tends to feed off itself. It makes sense to guard against this outcome, by making a
substantive rate cut, particularly given the space the Fed has on the inflation side of its mandate.
Indeed, even as rates fall, some households and businesses that had locked in low rates during the
pandemic may experience a tightening as they refinance.

Advocates for a 25bp cut argue that the inflation battle is not yet won. It is true that services
inflation remains high. But a significant proportion of that comes from shelter costs, which include
components that lag above actual market prices. Excluding shelter, CPI inflation is below 2 per
cent. Wage growth, a key price pressure, is also tame. Elevated pay growth in the UK, by contrast,
is one reason why the Bank of England — which has already made its first cut — may hold fire
when it meets on Thursday.

Recent shifts in futures pricing have also improved the case for a heftier cut. For a few weeks,
investors were mostly expecting a 25bp cut in September, but market bets for a 50bp cut rose on
Friday, following comments by former Fed officials reported in the Financial Times. This has
lowered the risk of surprising the market on Wednesday and stirring a frantic sell-off. (Indeed,
over the summer, traders demonstrated their jitteriness over even slight misses in their
expectations.) If expectations for a larger cut do not recede notably by midweek, a 50bp cut would
be easier to communicate. A clear and calming tone from the Fed, in any case, would be needed.

But, if Powell does play it cautiously, with 25bp, there is a greater onus on him to flesh out the
central bank’s subsequent rate-cutting plans. A dovish tone that emphasises the need for cuts in
the final quarter, outlines the path beyond, and mentions the Fed’s willingness to make chunkier
cuts if needed, could help send the right signal to markets.
The US election, which is a day before the Fed’s next meeting in November, obscures the economic
outlook somewhat. Powell can only act on what he knows now, and is right to ignore politics —
including threats from Donald Trump over the Fed’s independence.
Central banking is an inexact science. Yes, uncertainty warrants caution, but it also means taking
out the right insurance when possible. A 50bp cut this week safeguards against overly restricting
the economy and adverse market reactions to any weak data releases before its next meeting.
Providing investors remain open to a bigger cut, invoking Brainard’s principle this time around
feels less justifiable.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
The editorial board
The FT View
US inflation
US interest rates
Federal Reserve

