FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion Unhedged

Our Jackson Hole speech
Definitely not what Jay would say

ROBERT ARMSTRONG

© Bloomberg

Robert Armstrong and Hakyung Kim
Published AUG 22 2025

This article is an on-site version of our Unhedged newsletter. Premium subscribers can sign up
here to get the newsletter delivered every weekday. Standard subscribers can upgrade to
Premium here, or explore all FT newsletters

Good morning. Walmart’s CEO Doug McMillon didn’t hold back on the impact of tariffs on his
company’s earnings call yesterday — costs were increasing by the week, he said. The big-box
retailer managed to keep its in-store inflation rate last quarter lower than that of the overall US
inflation rate. But how long can that last?
As a reminder, Unhedged will be off next week, enjoying the last days of the summer. We’ll return
to your inboxes on September 3. Email us: unhedged@ft.com.

Our Jackson Hole speech
The eyes and ears of the market are on Wyoming, where later today Federal Reserve chair Jay
Powell will give a speech at the central bank’s annual summit. We don’t know what Powell will say
or whether it will lean dovish or hawkish relative to expectations. We do know what we think he
should say, however. So here’s a punchy little talk we’d like to hear the chair give:
“Ladies and gentlemen, I hope you will forgive me, in this beautiful western setting, if I use a
somewhat hackneyed regional metaphor: This ain’t my first rodeo. I’ve been Fed chair since
2018, and spoken at these gatherings every year since. So this is, to be exact, rodeo number eight
for me.
Number eight will be my last. My time in this job (though not my time at the Fed) ends in May.
And at this late point in my tenure, I hope you’ll forgive me if I speak a bit more freely, plainly
and succinctly than I have in the past. I’m going to try to talk in a way that more Americans can
appreciate, because I think this is a particularly important moment for citizens to understand
what we do at the Fed and on the Federal Open Market Committee in particular, and why what
we do is important for our common prosperity.
So the economists watching from home can put away your Fed Speech Bingo cards: I won’t be
mentioning anchored expectations, dual mandates, symmetric objectives or inflation targeting.
Instead, I have two simple topics to address today. The first is cutting interest rates. The second is
cutting the bullshit.

I’ll start with rates. The last time I spoke here, my team and the members of the open market
committee and I felt pretty good — or rather, we felt a sense of relief. We had experienced a real
inflation scare, the severity of which we underestimated at first. But we had changed course
aggressively, and things were at last trending definitively in the right direction, in terms of both
inflation and jobs. ‘Inflation is now much closer to our objective, with prices having risen 2.5 per
cent over the past 12 months,’ I said then. The labour market, I said, ‘has cooled considerably
from its formerly overheated state’ and the small increase in the unemployment rate ‘mainly
reflects a substantial increase in the supply of workers and a slowdown from the previously
frantic pace of hiring’.
A year on, the picture is much harder to read. We know the number of new jobs the economy is
creating has slowed markedly, and this is a very serious concern. What we don’t know with any
certainty is how much of that has to do with falling demand for workers, and how much stems
from the falling supply of workers — a falling supply resulting from both changing immigration
patterns and a native-born workforce that is getting older. That’s why, as I have said before, the
key measure of the job market now is the unemployment rate, which attempts to capture the
supply as well as demand. The rate is rising, but remains low compared with most periods in the
past, and far from the levels we see in recessions. At the same time, other indicators are
consistent with a mild slowdown. To be quite plain, we don’t know exactly what is going on with
the jobs market, but we are concerned, and we are waiting hungrily for more data to trickle
through in the coming weeks.
Meanwhile, we have made no progress on inflation in the last year. In fact, we are moving
backwards. On our preferred measure, which excludes some volatile prices in the hopes of seeing
the underlying trend more clearly, inflation on the goods side of the economy, which was below
zero until recently, is rising quite quickly. Just as importantly, on the services side of the
economy, where we never brought inflation back down to an acceptable level, we have stopped
making progress. There are a million ways to analyse the numbers. But inflation is rising again,
period. American families know it. No theoretical arguments about how much of the increase is
down to tariffs, and whether it will be a one-time effect that will change that hard fact.

Given the concerning and confusing signals coming from the jobs side, and the bad signals on the
inflation side, cutting rates, or not, is no easy call. There has been a certain amount of chatter
about the two people on the FOMC who dissented from the decision to hold rates steady at our
last meeting. But that is just the committee doing what we do: looking at the information we
have, presenting our arguments to one another, and taking a vote. The other nine members of the
committee were firmly against cutting, but the dissents argued well and in good faith. They are
evidence that the process, at a difficult time, is working exactly how it is meant to.
Which brings us to my second point, cutting the bullshit. There has been a lot of talk about the end
of Fed independence and about the politicisation of the bank. This talk is way out of line — and
not because the Fed is not under political pressure. It is under pressure, as it has been for most of
its history, sometimes more acutely, sometimes less. Those who would paint the current situation
as unprecedented might want to read about the Fed during the administrations of, say, Lyndon
Johnson or Richard Nixon. If the late, great Paul Volcker was here, he’d tell you Ronald Reagan
was no cupcake, either.
The Federal Reserve is designed to withstand political pressure, and this design is written into
laws that have been affirmed and reaffirmed by our highest courts. The terms of Fed governors
are almost twice as long as a two-term presidential administration. We control much of our own
budget, and so on.
Those who worry that the president will appoint a Fed governor who cares more about the
administration’s agenda than the long-term prosperity of the country, I would note that Fed
independence has another important protection: the judgment of history. Those in the audience
who have served as central bankers, here or elsewhere, know what I’m talking about. We know
that we will not be remembered kindly for loyalty to party or president. If we do not put the
country first, and focus on the mandate that the country has given us, we can only be
remembered as fools or villains.
The Federal Reserve Bank of the United States is strong, is focused exclusively on the prosperity
of the people of this country, and will never willingly surrender its independence, which has
served this country so well. First rodeo or last, we are ready to ride. Thank you.”

One good read
The death of American exceptionalism has been greatly exaggerated.

FT Unhedged podcast
Can’t get enough of Unhedged? Listen to our
new podcast, for a 15-minute dive into the
latest markets news and financial headlines,
twice a week. Catch up on past editions of
the newsletter here.

Recommended newsletters for you
Due Diligence — Top stories from the world of corporate finance. Sign up here
The Lex Newsletter — Lex, our investment column, breaks down the week’s key themes, with
analysis by award-winning writers. Sign up here

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Robert Armstrong
Unhedged
Global inflation
US economy
US inflation

