FT PROFESSIONAL

Disrupted Times Covid-19

Markets shrug off highest rise in US inflation in almost 30 years
Investors focus on President Biden’s $1tn infrastructure deal

Darren Dodd
Published JUN 25 2021

This article is an on-site version of our Coronavirus Business Update newsletter. Please share this
with friends and colleagues who might find it valuable and let them know that, even if they are not
subscribers to the Financial Times, they can read the newsletter — and all of the FT — free for 30
days. Welcome and please sign up here.

Covid cases and vaccinations
Total global cases: 179.9m

Total doses given: 2.8bn

Get the latest worldwide picture with our vaccine tracker

Latest news
Spain has rejected a German attempt to impose an EU-wide quarantine
policy for UK visitors
Iceland will lift all Covid-19 restrictions on Saturday — the first European
country to do so (Reuters)
UK prime minister Boris Johnson has been urged to fire health secretary
Matt Hancock for breaching coronavirus restrictions
For up-to-the-minute coronavirus updates, visit our live blog
US stock markets today shrugged off the country’s highest annual rise in inflation for almost 30
years, building on their record highs following news of President Joe Biden’s $1tn infrastructure
deal.
Commerce department data showed the core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price
index, the Federal Reserve’s preferred measure of inflation, rose 3.4 per cent compared with last
year — the highest annual jump since April 1992.
Investors in bonds, whose returns are eroded by rising inflation, were unmoved as they struggled
to work out how the Fed will react to the rise in inflationary pressures. Although the central bank
suggested last week that rate rises could come sooner than expected, Fed governor Jay Powell told
Congress that the central bank would act only when there was “actual evidence of actual inflation
or other imbalances”.
Consumer spending was flat, according to the commerce department report, as Americans spent
more on services as the economy reopened, but less on goods. Incomes dropped for the second
month as the effect of federal stimulus cheques wore off.

Economists, however, remain optimistic, believing individual savings built up through the
pandemic will drive consumption. That belief, together with a successful vaccination programme
and an improving labour market, led one to suggest the US could experience consumer spending
growth of nine per cent this year — the strongest performance since 1946.
Read our series: Inflation — a new era?

Global economy
The Bank of England continued to echo the Fed, arguing that UK price rises, although greater
than expected, were “transitory”. It now believes inflation is likely to top 3 per cent in the coming
months. Survey data meanwhile showed consumer confidence stalling in June, and spending on
credit and debit cards falling as the Delta variant of coronavirus delayed the final loosening of
pandemic restrictions. Commercial landlords are still suffering from severe shortfalls in rent.
Athens approved an €8bn plan for Europe’s largest urban regeneration project, regarded as
crucial for Greece’s recovery from the pandemic. The scheme, which could bring up to 75,000 new
jobs, is on the site of the city’s former airport and will feature beachfront villas, high-end stores, a
marina, luxury hotels, a casino and the biggest public park in Europe.

Hellinikon’s mayor on a hill overlooking the former Athens airport © Yorgos Karahalis/Bloomberg

The US is benefiting from a $1.9tn stimulus but the cost of inoculating most of the world by mid2022 is barely three per cent of that at just $50bn, points out US national editor Edward Luce.
The west should take up this once-in-a-generation chance to “stamp its brand on global wellbeing”,
he argues.

Business
The US Federal Reserve relaxed pandemic restrictions on dividends and stock buybacks at US
banks as stress tests showed they could comfortably survive $500bn of losses. The results could
lead to a wave of shareholder payouts next week.

Companies editor Tom Braithwaite discusses the bitter battle between AstraZeneca and the EU
over vaccine supplies, a situation not helped by last week’s legal ruling over contractual obligations
that seemed to show “the EU won in theory and AstraZeneca in practice”. But despite the dispute
over deliveries, he writes, the reality is that member states and their citizens are shunning the
company’s jab, meaning unwanted doses are piling up.
Pandemic turbulence continues to hit the global travel industry. American Airlines pilots are in
a row with the US carrier over staffing levels and flight cancellations while the UK industry called
for more financial support as the government unveiled changes to its “green list” of safe
destinations. Cruise operator Carnival reported a $2.1bn loss in its second quarter but reported
strong demand for bookings. The locals in Venice are less keen to see the big ships return.

The return of cruise ships to Venice has sparked protests © Marco Sabadin/AFP via Getty Images

Markets
The combination of the pandemic and international sanctions has led to a crisis in North Korea,
with big swings in its currency and food prices and the potential unravelling of the country’s
unofficial market trading system, known as jangmadang. One defector said prices for food and
basic goods had soared by between three and 10 times.

Jumana Saleheen and Lavan Mahadeva of the CRU consultancy write in the FT that there is
nothing “super” about the current commodities cycle. The imbalance between supply and
demand during the pandemic recovery period will probably ease as economies reopen and
consumer spending patterns change, they argue
Although millions of people have lost their jobs and savings during the pandemic, the well-off
managed to retain their income. Wealth correspondent Stefan Wagstyl examines their investment
options.

Have your say
Horsesatemymoney comments on Bagpipes and barbecues: incentives abound to lure staff back to
the office:

The “water cooler”moments are basically nonsense that doesn’t really
happen anyway. All this bagpipery etc is silliness. Give people a proper
reason to go in and they will do — I mean a real reason like something where
face-to-face catching up is better, not fake incentives like food/music, and
make your work environment better! But accept that people want to WFT,
want flexibility and that they are fed up with wasting time, money and
energy on commuting. Also, until most of your workforce is double-jabbed,
people will have concerns around Covid and the impact of Covid precautions
on the office environment — by which I mean no one is going to want to
come in to wear a face mask all day.

Final thought
Have you taken to two wheels for getting round the city during the pandemic? Read the favourite
routes of FT journalists across the world and share your own tips in preparation for our new FT
Globetrotter series.

Recommended newsletters
Editor’s Choice — The FT Editor’s personal selection of favourite stories. Sign up here
#techFT — The latest on the most pressing issues in the tech sector. Sign up here

We would really like to hear from you. Please send your reactions or suggestions
to covid@ft.com. Thanks

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
World
Covid-19
Disrupted Times
Darren Dodd

