FT PROFESSIONAL

Opinion US inflation

The Fed is needlessly delaying rate cuts
By dragging its feet, the central bank risks harming both financial markets and the economy

CLAUDIA SAHM

The US Federal Reserve wants more data before making any rate cuts. The longer rates stay high, however, the more it risks causing
serious damage © Samuel Corum/Bloomberg

Claudia Sahm
Published FEB 14 2024

The writer is a former Federal Reserve economist, founder of Sahm Consulting and a writer of
the Stay-at-Home Macro blog
Consumer prices in the US rose more than expected in January, largely owing to shelter costs. And
while the Federal Reserve’s preferred inflation metric should be more benign, this was a reminder
that the path back to low inflation remains a bumpy one.

But creating bigger bumps in the rest of the economy and financial markets would be a mistake
that the Fed must avoid this year.
The good news is that inflation has cooled over the past several months and is moving rapidly
towards the Fed’s 2 per cent target, the last month notwithstanding. So, the question is when and
how much the Fed will cut its policy interest rate.
As is often the case, the central bank has been intentionally vague. In an interview, Fed chair Jay
Powell said his team needed to see “more good data . . . It doesn’t need to be better than what we’ve
seen, or even as good.” But how good is good enough? Powell implied that May was the earliest that
the Fed would even consider a rate cut. We can expect them to want several more months of good
inflation data, then, on top of several months of good inflation data. Clearly, the bar is high.
The Fed is weighing rate cuts against the backdrop of a strong economy. Inflation-adjusted gross
domestic product rose 3 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2023 relative to a year earlier, far above
the Fed’s forecast this time last year of basically no growth. The unemployment rate has been
below 4 per cent for the longest stretch since the 1960s. And all with substantial disinflation.
Some think this strong growth means the Fed should not cut. But that argument relies on the
dubious Phillips curve that says to get inflation down, unemployment must rise. The economy in
2023 showed that was wrong; instead, high inflation was largely due to Covid-related disruptions
that are unwinding. Plus, 2019 had similar growth and unemployment along with less than 2 per
cent inflation. Finally, the Fed has a dual mandate of low inflation and low unemployment.
Keeping rates high until the labour market cracks is not acceptable.
At the end of last year, the Fed disavowed the need for below-trend growth to get inflation down.
Now, the central bank views that strength as giving it the “luxury of time” to build confidence in
inflation. The logic is different, but it risks a recession, which is what pro-Phillips curve
commentators think we need.

The risks are real. The federal funds rate is up 5.25 percentage points within two years, and that
has put pressure on the housing market. In fact, the Fed is pushing up home prices, because the
people who have low, fixed-rate mortgages are unwilling to sell. So new homebuyers are grappling
with higher mortgage rates, high home prices and a lack of homes to buy. So far, the rest of the
economy has been able to keep the weakness in housing from spreading, but that is not guaranteed
to continue.
Another risk is financial markets. The Fed’s rapid, large and unexpected rate rises since 2022 have
strained credit markets and banks. So far, borrowers and lenders have navigated them. But, as the
dramatic failure of Silicon Valley Bank shows, this environment punishes bad or even unlucky
business decisions. It’s hard to say where the pockets of weakness are now, but the longer rates
stay high, the more the Fed risks seriously damaging the economy.
Several officials have said the “worst possible outcome” would be for the Fed to start cutting and
then have to raise rates if inflation picks back up. It’s an odd, albeit unsurprising, worry, since the
Fed has a history of “policy adjustments”. The world changes and so does policy. But the world has
changed with notable disinflation, and the Fed is not changing its policy.
From its start, this cycle has had little to do with the Fed. We are so close to unwinding the final
Covid disruptions. Now it is not the time for the central bank to drag its feet on rate cuts. It is the
time for the Fed to get out of the way.

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Claudia Sahm
US inflation
US interest rates
Central banks

Federal Reserve

