FT PROFESSIONAL

Global inflation

World’s largest wealth fund warns ‘permanent’ inflation will hit returns
Equities and bonds to suffer as steep rise in rates becomes lasting feature of economy, says Norwegian oil
fund boss

Nicolai Tangen, chief executive of Norway’s $1.3tn oil fund, says he is seeing inflation ‘across the board, in more and more places’ ©
Odin Jaeger/Bloomberg

Richard Milne and Robin Wigglesworth in Oslo
Published JAN 30 2022

Get ahead with daily markets updates. Join the FT's WhatsApp channel
The world’s largest sovereign wealth fund has warned that investors face years of low returns as the
surge in inflation becomes a permanent feature of the global economy.
Nicolai Tangen, chief executive of Norway’s $1.3tn oil fund, told the Financial Times he was “the
team leader for team permanent” in the fierce debate over whether the jump in rates was transitory
or a lasting threat.

Consumer price inflation is running at its highest level for more than two decades in the world’s big
industrial economies, in particular in the US, where the annual pace of price growth hit 7 per cent
in December, up from just 0.1 per cent in May 2020.
Tangen said the oil fund, which owns the equivalent of 1.5 per cent of every listed company in the
world, thought inflation “could be stronger than what is generally expected” as the world
experiences high demand and lingering disruption to supply chains.
“We are seeing it across the board, in more and more places. You saw Ikea increasing prices by 9
per cent, you have seen food prices going up, continued very high freight rates, trucking rates,
metals, commodities, energy, gas . . . We’re seeing signs on wages as well.”
The former hedge fund manager said: “How will it pan out? It hits bonds and shares at the same
time . . . for the next few years, it will hit both.”
Economists are divided over whether the surge in inflation will be fleeting. Some have argued that
the pandemic caused a temporary shock to supply chains that coincided with a sharp economic
recovery, which will ease over time.
Market measures of inflation expectations suggested investors were not overly concerned about
runaway inflation. One popular gauge, the 10-year break-even rate, showed inflation moderating
from today’s levels to roughly 2.5 per cent. The two-year measure indicated inflation would remain
just above 3 per cent in the near term.
But Tangen said other factors, including more people retiring or leaving their jobs, strengthened
his view that the rises were permanent.
Both bonds and stocks started 2022 on the back foot, and investors’ longer-term expectations for
mainstream capital markets are becoming gloomier.
AQR Capital Management, a quantitative investment group, estimated that a classic balanced
portfolio of 60 per cent stocks and 40 per cent bonds would return just 2 per cent annually after
inflation over the next five to 10 years. That is under half the roughly 5 per cent average enjoyed
over the past century.

Large investors have sought to beef up returns with “alternative” investment strategies, including
hedge funds, venture capital and real estate. Their assets under management grew to $13.3tn last
year, according to data provider Preqin, which predicted the alternative investment industry’s
assets would grow to $23.2tn by the end of 2026.
The mandate of the oil fund, housed in Norway’s central bank, includes only stocks, bonds and real
estate. It had its fourth-strongest year for returns last year, posting a 14.5 per cent increase. It has
grown steadily since the global financial crisis in 2008, but Tangen warned that could be coming to
an end.
“We will have much tougher times ahead . . . with extremely low interest rates and a very high stock
market, and with increasing — and in some places, accelerating — inflation, we could see a long
period of time with low returns,” he said.
Historically the fund had “outperformed in up markets and underperformed in down markets”, he
said. However, the former founder of London-based hedge fund AKO Capital, who took charge of
the oil fund in September 2020, is aiming to change that through “a lot of smaller tweaks”,
including employing forensic accountants to help find potential fraud cases it could sell out of.
Additional reporting by Colby Smith in New York

Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2026. All rights reserved.

Follow the topics in this article
Sovereign bonds
Global inflation
Asset management
Equities
Markets

