Markets

Investors Jump Into Riskiest Assets After US Inflation
Report

UnmuteSuggests Fed Rates Should Be 150-175 Bps Lower
Bessent

0:00
0:00
Bessent Suggests Fed Rates Should Be 150-175 Bps Lower

By Lynn Thomasson and Sagarika Jaisinghani
August 13, 2025 at 6:47 AM EDT
Updated on August 13, 2025 at 8:28 AM EDT
Save

Translate

4:58

Takeaways by Bloomberg AI
Traders are snapping up risky assets in the hope that falling US interest rates
will add fuel to the economy, with shares of small-cap, emerging-market and
semiconductor companies leading gains.
The mood on Wall Street is "surprisingly bullish", according to Neil Birrell, chief
investment officer at Premier Miton Investors, with some investors detached
from economic reality and a wave of optimism or exuberance in equity
markets.
Some investors, such as Bernard Ahkong, CIO at UBS O'Connor Global MultiStrategy Alpha, see potential risks to dent sentiment and expectations, but do
not think the market is being irrational at this point in time.

Traders are snapping up risky assets of all stripes in the hope that falling US
interest rates will add rocket fuel to an economy that’s so far been able to
withstand the effects of Donald Trump’s trade war.
Wall Street is set to extend record highs when trading begins on Wednesday,
with shares of small-cap, emerging-market and semiconductor companies
leading gains. Across global markets, everything from volatility indexes to
speculative European bank bonds to crypto is underscoring a sense of
confidence about corporate profits and global economic growth.
Here's Why There Isn't More Fear in the Fear Index

7:45

Listen to the Here’s Why podcast on Apple, Spotify or anywhere you listen.
Any worries about President Trump’s tariffs and whether America’s
confusing economic policy is casting a chill on spending are being wiped
away by the earnings power of big US tech companies. The latest economic
readings also paint a picture of a soft labor market and inflation that’s been
in line with expectations, which may allow the Federal Reserve to cut
interest rates at its next meeting. For some investors, the question now is
whether assets prices have risen too fast, given that the full effect of tariffs
may take some time to filter through the US economy.
“The mood is surprisingly bullish; it’s almost like ‘what tariffs, who cares?’
said Neil Birrell, chief investment officer at Premier Miton Investors.
“There’s this detachment from economic reality on what’s happening and
there’s a wave of either optimism or exuberance in equity markets.”
Read more: Tracking How Markets Are Reacting to Trump’s Second Term
At the moment, the mood on Wall Street is all about the optimism for rate
cuts. Swaps are pricing in about a 90% chance of a quarter-point move by

the Fed in September, and some traders betting on an even bigger reduction.
In an interview on Bloomberg TV, Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent said “we
should probably be 150, 175 basis points lower.”
The S&P 500 has surged almost 30% since a low in April, when Trump first
unveiled his tariff plans. The gauge is also up 11% since he won the election
in November. The Russell 2000 index of small-cap stocks is gaining for a
fourth straight month.
“The US market has gotten a new leg of steam,” said Guy Miller, chief
investment strategist at Zurich Insurance Co. “We’re no longer hearing
about so much diversification away from the United States. In fact, the
reverse. Investors are saying the only sure thing is that US big-cap tech are
going to continue to deliver on earnings.”
In another sign of market confidence: volatility measures have collapsed.
The VIX gauge of expected volatility in the stock market is at the lowest since
December, while the MOVE Index of bond-market volatility is at its most
subdued since 2022. A measure of implied price swings in currency markets
is also at the lowest in a year.
Traders are also snapping up risky forms of debt, like Additional Tier 1
bonds, a kind of speculative bank notes that are popular in Europe.
“Do I see a lot of potential risks to dent some of the sentiment and
expectations? I do,” said Bernard Ahkong, CIO at UBS O’Connor Global
Multi-Strategy Alpha, said in a Bloomberg TV interview. “But I do not think
the market is being irrational at this point in time. We could go a lot further
before the market gets irrational. It’s very expensive right now to be
bearish.”
Renewed buzz around artificial intelligence has once again put the
technology behemoths in the lead. Megacap tech stocks almost singlehandedly drove earnings growth in the second quarter, accounting for 90%
of the overall increase in S&P 500 profits, according to an analysis by
Deutsche Bank AG strategists.

What Bloomberg Strategists Say
“It would be foolish to fight this stock market rally, even if the fundamental
framework underpinning the market seems extremely flimsy. At some
point, the rise in US long-end yields will damage equities, if they don’t trip
themselves up first, or we don’t get another Trump curveball. But there’s
no need to prematurely trade that narrative.”
— Mark Cudmore, Markets Live Executive Editor. Click here

for the full

analysis.

Signed
Sign Up
Up
By continuing, I agree to the Privacy Policy and Terms of Service.

The whiplash in stocks this year has made it difficult for equity strategists to
keep up. Some — such as Morgan Stanley’s Michael Wilson and former Wells
Fargo strategist Chris Harvey — were among forecasters whose nerves of
steel during the April rout proved right in the end. Strategists at Goldman
Sachs Group Inc. and Citigroup Inc. were less successful. They rushed to
slash targets in the aftermath of the trade announcements, only to return to
a bullish view later.
Now, Wall Street prognosticators are turning even more optimistic. Citigroup
strategist Scott Chronert raised his year-end target for the S&P 500 again this
month, partly because he expects tax cuts to offset the impact of tariffs.
In other markets, though, the recovery from April is less assured. US 10-year
yields are within five basis points of levels seen at the end of March.
Bloomberg’s gauge of the dollar is still down more than 9% from its high
before inauguration day.
“Rates are going to continue to price in further Fed rate cuts on the back of
the increasing debate that we’re likely see a 25- or 50-basis-point move in
September,” said Laura Cooper, head of macro credit and global investment

strategist at Nuveen. “The inflation print yesterday cleared the way for that
debate to become a bit move lively.”
— With assistance from Freya Jones, Alice Atkins, and Sujata Rao
(Updates with additional quote and latest market pricing.)

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

