Economics | Inflation & Prices

Traders and Consumers Lower Their Expectations for
US Inflation

US Unmute
Producer Prices Top Estimates in November at 0.3%

0:00
0:00
US Producer Prices Top Estimates in November at 0.3%

By Sydney Maki
December 9, 2022 at 12:09 PM EST
Save

Translate

2:50

This article is for subscribers only.

Bond traders and US consumers alike are getting more comfortable with the
idea that inflationary pressures have peaked in the world’s top economy,
allowing the Federal Reserve to adopt a more cautious approach.
So-called breakeven rates on inflation-linked debt and derivatives —
measures of what traders anticipate consumer prices will do over the
coming decade — have slipped from a week ago. That’s just as preliminary
data from the University of Michigan showed consumers’ short-term

inflation expectations unexpectedly ebbed to the lowest level in more than a
year.
All that sets the scene for the November consumer price index on Tuesday,
which is expected to show a 7.3% year-on-year increase, down slightly from a
month earlier. A day later, the Fed is forecast to deliver a half-point hike,
capping a streak of four straight three-quarter-point moves.
Bond traders expect the monetary authority’s overnight rate to plateau at
about 5% by mid-2023 as the central bank takes time to assess the impact of
its policy changes. Odds of a modest US recession and waning price pressure
in the coming year has fueled a rally in Treasuries over the past month, led
by longer-dated securities.
The following is a series of indicators on how the market views US inflation.
Inflation Snapshot

Inflation News Bites
Brazil’s consumer prices

rose less than forecast on temporary, Black

Friday shopping discounts as the central bank warns that greater public
spending could pressure inflation going forward.
The Bank of England said the expectations that British consumers have
about where inflation is headed drifted further above its 2% target, and
more people were dissatisfied with the way the central bank is doing its
job.

China’s factory-gate prices contracted again in November while consumer
inflation eased as Covid disruptions suppressed demand, giving the
central bank some room to ease policy as the economy tries to recover.
Soaring tuna prices are among the items driving Japan’s fastest inflation in
four decades and a fall in purchasing power that are together testing the
limits of the country’s outlier policy mix.
With inflation rising at the highest rate

since 1996, the forint sliding

and teachers staging another national walkout, it’s been a tough week for
Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orban.
Key Upcoming US Releases
Dec. 13: Consumer Price Index for November
Dec. 14: Import and Export Price Indexes for November
Dec. 14: Federal Open Market Committee policy decision
Dec. 22: GDP report, including PCE deflators, for third quarter (third
reading)
Dec. 23: Personal income and spending report, including personal
consumption expenditure gauges, for November; University of Michigan
inflation expectations gauges for December (final)
Jan. 6: Monthly jobs report, including average wages data, for December
Jan. 18: Producer Price Index for December

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters

Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

