Markets

Bullish Stocks Narrative Seen Intact After US
Inflation Data
Inflation view won’t shift, Richard Bernstein Advisors says
Mismatch between spending and income is worrying, Sosnick says

By Isabelle Lee
March 29, 2024 at 10:17 AM EDT
Updated on March 29, 2024 at 12:10 PM EDT
Save

Translate

5:01

This article is for subscribers only.

A cooldown in the Federal Reserve’s preferred gauge of underlying inflation
last month, coupled with a rebound in household spending, failed to shift
the Wall Street consensus that has lifted stocks to records in the first quarter.
The so-called core personal consumption expenditures price index, which
strips out the volatile food and energy components, rose 0.3% from the
prior month, slowing from January’s surprisingly strong reading.
The data, released with markets closed for the Good Friday holiday, are in
line with the view that while inflation has cooled, it remains stubbornly
higher than the Federal Reserve would like, limiting the scope for interest
rate cuts this year. At the same time, the numbers are reassuring strategists
that the economy continues to hold up just fine after the Fed’s rate-hiking
campaign of the past two years.
“Bottom line: I don’t see this doing anything to change either the Fed’s or
the market’s narrative right now,” said Steve Sosnick, chief strategist at
Interactive Brokers.
Read more:

Fed’s Core Inflation Gauge Posts Biggest Sequential Gain in Year
Wall Street on Edge as Momentum Trade Wraps Up Historic Quarter
Powell Juices Bond Market Bet on Inflation With Tilt to Jobs

Swaps traders on Thursday slightly trimmed wagers that the Fed would cut
rates as soon as June, reinforced by the latest Fedspeak. On Wednesday, Fed
Governor Christopher Waller said there was no rush to lower interest rates
and emphasized that recent economic data warrants delaying or reducing
the number of cuts seen this year.
Fed Chair Jerome Powell said Friday’s data is what he was expecting, while
acknowledging that the latest reading wasn’t as good as the ones last year.
“It’s good to see something coming in in line with expectations,” Powell said
at an event at the San Francisco Fed after the data release. “February is
lower but it’s not as low as most of the good readings we got in the second
half of last year; but it’s definitely more along the lines of what we want to
see.”

Signed
Sign Up
Up
By continuing, I agree to the Privacy Policy and Terms of Service.

The data comes after a stellar quarter for stocks as investors pile on bets the
Fed will be able to achieve a soft landing. Up 10% in the first three months,
the benchmark S&P 500 has broken its record 22 times this year, boosting
US equity values by $4 trillion. The rapid ascent has led some to worry about
the market running too hot. On Friday, two-year yields, more sensitive than
longer-maturity debt to Fed policy expectations, rose five basis points to
4.62%.

One concerning part of Friday’s report was the mismatch between spending
and income, said Sosnick. While higher spending boosts the economy shortterm, it’s unsustainable to spend more and make less. Real personal
spending climbed 0.4% last month, above estimates for a 0.1% increase.
US equity and bond futures will open as usual at 6 p.m. New York time
Sunday following the holiday.

Here’s what others on Wall Street are saying:
Dan Suzuki, deputy chief investment officer at Richard Bernstein Advisors:
It’s a pretty mixed report, so I wouldn’t expect it to meaningfully shift the
narrative on inflation or the Fed. The story remains that the steady
moderation of inflation has stalled above where the Fed wants it to be, and if
growth continues to gain momentum, or even just stays as strong as it’s been,
there’s a real risk that inflation heads higher. That would lead us down the
path toward no Fed cuts and potentially even a hike.
Marvin Loh, senior macro strategist at State Street Global Markets:
Inflation readings look in line. The Fed had these numbers in mind via CPI and
PPI when they met last week. Supercore look to surprise notably to the

downside, which will keep a June cut in the cards. Overall, the numbers are not
low enough to give the Fed comfort that 2% target will be reached comfortably,
but there is a low threshold to start the normalization process this summer.
Chris Low, chief economist at FHN Financial
It underscores the caution Fed Governor Chris Waller and others have
expressed recently. They still expect to cut rates this year, but in Waller’s words,
there is “no rush,” especially with the strongest real consumer spending since
December.
Zachary Hill, head of portfolio management at Horizon Investments:
Data doesn’t change the outlook for monetary policy. But it does reinforce the
patient stance that the more hawkish members of the Fed have advanced
recently. It further entrenches the notion that the evolution of incoming data,
and not economic forecasts, will be the guidepost to interest rates.
Jeffrey Roach, chief economist at LPL Financial:
The trajectory for consumer spending is weakening, especially since real
disposable incomes declined in February. Core services inflation is slowing and
will likely continue throughout the year. By the time the Fed meets in June, the
data should be convincing enough for them to commence its rate
normalization process. But where we sit today, markets need to have the same
patience the Fed is exhibiting.
Jay Hatfield, chief executive officer at Infrastructure Capital Advisors:
The print might be slightly positive for markets on Monday but PCE can
essentially be derived from CPI/PPI. More importantly, French CPI printed
this AM at only 0.3% vs expectations of 0.6% with Y/Y rolling down to only
2.3% from 3%. This data validates our view that the ECB will cut rates in June
and the Fed will lag with a July cut as PCE continues to print slightly hot over
the next few months as the shelter component continues to dramatically
overstate rent inflation.
— With assistance from Elena Popina and Rita Nazareth

(Updates with Fed Chair Jerome Powell’s comment in sixth, seventh paragaphs.)

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

