Economics | Inflation & Prices

US Inflation Shows Signs of Moderating, Giving Fed
Room to Pause
Consumer prices rose 4.9% on an annual basis, below forecast
Narrow service measure watched by Fed also cooled in April

Unmute
Underlying
US Inflation Moderated Slightly in April

0:00
0:00
Underlying US Inflation Moderated Slightly in April

By Augusta Saraiva
May 10, 2023 at 8:34 AM EDT
Updated on May 10, 2023 at 9:31 AM EDT
Save

Translate

3:45

This article is for subscribers only.

US inflation showed signs of moderating in April, giving the Federal Reserve
room to pause interest-rate increases soon.
The consumer price index rose by 4.9% from a year earlier, the first sub-5%
reading in two years, a Bureau of Labor Statistics report showed Wednesday.

Excluding food and energy, the so-called core consumer price index also
cooled slightly.
A narrower price measure often cited by Fed officials — tracking services that
have boomed as the pandemic faded — showed an even more pronounced
slowdown, registering the smallest monthly increase since mid-2022 as
airfares and hotel costs declined.
US stocks opened higher, Treasuries rallied and the dollar weakened.
Follow the reaction in real time here on Bloomberg’s TOPLive blog
Metric

Actual

Median Estimate

CPI MoM

+0.4%

+0.4%

Core CPI MoM

+0.4%

+0.4%

CPI YoY

+4.9%

+5%

Core CPI YoY

+5.5%

+5.5%

The report suggests that inflation is cooling as a year’s worth of interest-rate
increases and recent credit stress work their way through the economy.
However, overall prices are still rising at a brisk pace and the job market
remains robust.
The Fed will need to see more than one month of data to be confident that
price pressures are on a sustained downward path, especially after officials
hinted last week that they may be done hiking for now.
That said, Wednesday’s report will be one of several that factor into
policymakers’ decision next month. They’ll also receive the CPI for May, as
well as reports on the labor market and their preferred inflation measure,
the personal consumption expenditures index. Additionally, officials are still
monitoring the ongoing banking stress and to what extent that will further
tighten credit conditions.

Several key elements of US inflation showed moderation in April, as prices
for airfares, hotel stays and new cars declined. Appliances fell by the most
on record.
Shelter costs, which are the biggest services component and make up about
one-third of the overall CPI index, rose 0.4% last month, the smallest in over
a year. Measures of rent advanced.
Because of the way the housing metrics are calculated, there’s a significant
lag between real-time price changes and the government statistics. Other
metrics suggest these gauges will soon turn over, but economists are split on
the exact timing.
What Bloomberg Economics Says...
“While the April CPI report isn’t exactly reassuring, it also won’t jolt Fed
officials into signaling another rate hike in June, given their expectation
that the full disinflationary impact from tighter credit conditions has yet to
show up. However, the slow progress in reducing core inflation highlights
how unlikely it is that the Fed will cut rates this year.”
— Anna Wong and Jonathan Church, economists
To read the full note, click here
Stripping out energy and housing, services prices were up 0.1% in April and
5.1% from a year ago, both the weakest since July, according to Bloomberg
calculations. Policymakers have stressed the importance of looking at such a
metric when assessing the nation’s inflation trajectory, though they compute
it based on a separate index.
Read more: US Core Services Inflation Cools to Slowest Pace in Nine Months

Source: Bloomberg

The goods disinflation that was dragging down overall price pressures last
year has been losing steam. Excluding food and energy, goods prices were
up 0.6% in April, the most since June. Used-car prices — a key driver of
slower price growth in recent months — rebounded to rise the most in nearly
two years.
Energy prices climbed 0.6% in the month, driven by higher pump prices.
While grocery costs fell for a second month, the price of dining out
continued to rise. Baby food and formula prices rose the most on record.
While Fed officials agree that wage gains and price growth are related,
they’re divided as to which drives the other. A separate report out
Wednesday showed real average hourly earnings climbed 0.1% in April, and
were down 0.5% from a year earlier.
MLIV Pulse Survey
Are the odds of a US default this time higher than in 2011? Share your views here.

— With assistance from Chris Middleton, Reade Pickert, Matthew Boesler,
Sophie Caronello, and Liz Capo McCormick
(Updates with market open)

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

