Markets

Rate Cut Odds Wane in Emerging Asia as US Inflation
Speeds
Indonesia seen as ‘most sensitive’ to possible US Fed pivot
RBA, RBNZ seen among last of major banks to begin rate cuts

The Bank Indonesia headquarters in Jakarta. Photographer: Rosa Panggabean/Bloomberg

By Swati Pandey
April 11, 2024 at 3:49 AM EDT
Save

Translate

2:25

This article is for subscribers only.

Asian central banks may have to consider the possibility of fewer or no rate
cuts this year after stronger-than-expected US inflation drove markets to
push back the probability of monetary policy easing in the world’s largest
economy.

Data on Wednesday showed a key US price gauge topped forecasts for a third
straight month in March, sending the dollar surging and spurring traders to
bet the US Federal Reserve will now cut just once, or probably twice, this
year. At the end of March, as many as four rate reductions were priced in.
That, in turn, had ramifications across Asia where markets now see, on
average, one cut within a year, from two earlier.
“Asian central banks have to be cognizant of interest rate differentials and
risk of stronger US dollar for longer,” said Sonal Varma, chief economist,
India and Asia ex-Japan for Nomura Holdings Inc. “Fed repricing and strong
dollar are also occurring in the backdrop of higher oil prices. So this has
increased the bar for rate cuts in Asia.”

Indonesia is seen as the “most sensitive” to Fed policy changes, followed by
South Korea, Varma said, adding that Nomura recently reduced the
quantum of rate cuts it expects this year in Thailand, Indonesia and the
Philippines to 50 basis points, from 100 earlier.
Barclays Bank Plc’s Bum Ki Son sees the risk of a rate hike from Bank
Indonesia if the rupiah stays above 16,000. At the same time, he sees “very
low chance” of a near-term cut by the Philippines and for Singapore and
Malaysia to stand pat all of this year.

US Inflation Bad News for Asian Bonds, Especially Indonesia’s
For Australia and New Zealand, the pull back in Fed rate pricing has further
cemented expectations for higher-for-longer interest rates.
Royal Bank of Canada’s Australia Chief Economist Su-Lin Ong had long said
she expects the RBA to be the last of major central banks to cut rates. In a
note on Thursday, Ong said she sees the risk of an even later start to the
RBA’s easing cycle and one that is more prolonged.
“Markets are largely priced for this and indeed may well take out all RBA
easing in 2024 and push it into 2025,” she said.
Prashant Newnaha, Singapore-based senior Asia-Pacific rates strategist, said
there is very little that regional central banks can do in the face of a rising
greenback and persistent US inflationary pressures.
“There is little regional central banks can do but slow the pace of currency
depreciation. However fundamentals don’t warrant them stepping in at the
moment,” he added.
— With assistance from Garfield Reynolds

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

