Economics | Inflation & Prices

What Went Wrong With US Inflation
Fed chair ignited rally by signaling rate cuts in December
Housing, insurance, commodity prices among contributors

A customer places items on a conveyor belt at a checkout counter in Salt Lake City, Utah. Photographer:
George Frey/Bloomberg

By Molly Smith and Steve Matthews
April 17, 2024 at 3:25 PM EDT
Save

Translate

5:13

This article is for subscribers only.

This was supposed to be the year that US inflation rode the last mile down to
2%, letting the Federal Reserve steadily reduce interest rates from a twodecade high. Now those expectations have been dashed.

Price gains have proven much stickier than anticipated a few months into
2024 amid a resilient economy and labor market. On Tuesday, Fed Chair
Jerome Powell said persistent inflation means borrowing costs will stay
elevated for longer than previously thought, a shift in tone with
ramifications for policy around the world.
Underlying Inflation in US Tops Forecasts for a Third Month
March CPI report indicates stubborn price pressures that will likely delay Fed
Change in CPI ex-food, energy (MoM)

Change in CPI services ex-housing, energy (MoM)
1.0 %

0.5

0
Dec Feb Apr
2021 2022

Jun

Aug

Oct

Dec

Feb Apr
2023

Jun

Aug

Oct

Dec

Feb
2024

Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Bloomberg

A persistent shortage of housing is partly to blame, as are rising commodity
prices and car insurance premiums. But some also point to Powell himself
for prematurely telegraphing interest-rate cuts, which ignited optimism in
financial markets and fueled economic activity.
“They just got the inflation picture wrong,” said Stephen Stanley, chief US
economist at Santander US Capital Markets LLC. “The mistake they made
was they got really enamored with the combination of really strong growth
and benign inflation that we saw in the second half of last year.”
Traders now see just one to two rate cuts this year from the current level of
5.25% to 5.5%. That’s a far cry from the roughly six they expected at the start
of 2024, and the three that Fed officials penciled in just a month ago.
Investors and economists are flagging the chance of no cuts at all this year.
Fed officials maintain that inflation is still broadly on a downward trend, but
they’ve also stressed that borrowing costs won’t be moving lower until

they’re more confident in that trajectory.
While much of the inflation damage has been most evident in the consumer
price index — which accelerated to 3.5% in March from a year earlier — the
Fed’s preferred metric is the personal consumption expenditures price
index. The PCE has been running closer to the central bank’s 2% target —
registering 2.5% in February — but progress on that gauge has also stalled.
Here are some reasons for the latest wave of US inflation:
Shelter, Insurance
Shelter, which accounts for about a third of the CPI, has proved the most
stubborn. Despite some timelier measures from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics, Zillow Group Inc. and Apartment List that show rent growth for
new leases coming down, the corresponding components in the CPI have yet
to reflect that.
Part of the delay is because most tenants don’t move in a given year. That’s
especially true now for homeowners as well, many of whom locked in cheap
mortgage rates during the pandemic and don’t want to take on a new one
above 7%.
Also, the construction of the index plays a role: Units are sampled only every
six months, which means changes in rents take time to work through the
monthly data.
The PCE, meanwhile, assigns shelter a much lower weight, which helps
explain why it’s trended lower than the CPI.
Another driver of inflation is insurance costs. Tenants’ and household
insurance is rising at the fastest rate in nine years, while auto insurance
skyrocketed 22.2% in the year through March, the most since 1976. A key
reason: Cars are more technologically complicated now and therefore cost
more to repair.
Commodities

After falling for much of last year, energy prices — specifically oil — climbed
in the first quarter, and an escalation in the war in the Middle East threatens
to push them even higher. The rally has translated to more expensive
gasoline. Electricity prices have also climbed.
Central bankers prefer to look at so-called core measures of inflation, which
strip out food and energy prices that can be volatile. They’ve also eyed an
even narrower gauge known as “supercore,” referring to services costs
excluding energy and housing — and even that’s been too strong due to a
robust labor market.
But the surge in the price of oil and other raw materials is impossible to
ignore, as it can filter through to costlier shipping and merchandise.
Gasoline and shelter combined accounted for over half of the monthly
advance in the March CPI.
Powell Pivot
In December, Powell spurred big market bets on rate cuts by saying such
moves were “clearly” a topic of discussion.
The comments’ effect was equal to lowering interest rates by 0.14 percentage
point — and also will add about a half percentage point to the CPI this year,
according to Anna Wong, chief US economist at Bloomberg Economics.
Now Powell “is entertaining the possibility that disinflation has indeed
stalled, and that the bar for cutting rates may have increased,” Wong said.
“That raises the risk that there won’t be a rate cut this year, if the
unemployment rate is little changed from today.”
Market Euphoria
In addition to the economic impact since Powell’s December remarks, stocks
and bonds have added $7.5 trillion to their combined values through the
market’s peak in March — equivalent to roughly 30% of US gross domestic
product.
The prospect of lower rates has encouraged investors to bid up risky assets
of all stripes. The S&P 500 has scored 22 record highs in 2024, while

corporate bond risk premiums — the extra yield investors demand over
Treasuries — narrowed this month to a more than two-year low.

All of this is contributing to a material easing in financial conditions, with a
Bloomberg index tracking the investment backdrop now more
accommodative than before the Fed embarked on its aggressive tightening
two years ago.
Claudia Sahm, a former senior Fed economist, blames markets, not Powell.
“The degree of motivated listening is mind blowing,” said Sahm, chief
economist at New Century Advisors LLC.
— With assistance from Matthew Boesler, Lu Wang (News), and Sid Verma

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

