Economics | Inflation & Prices

Tenacious US Inflation Reaches Past Housing and
Proves Hard to Tame
CPI excluding food, energy increased by most in five months
Excluding housing and energy, services costs climbed 0.5%

A sign advertising apartments for rent in San Francisco. Photographer: Justin Sullivan/Getty Images

By Reade Pickert, Vince Golle, and Augusta Saraiva
March 14, 2023 at 11:43 AM EDT
Save

Translate

3:33

This article is for subscribers only.

Wall Street may be grappling with financial fallout from a new banking crisis,
but the beast of persistent and elevated US inflation is proving tough to
tame.

Underlying consumer-price growth accelerated in February, with Americans
continuing to experience the sting of rising rents and sticky prices for
services. Over the past year, a key housing category — which includes
everything from actual rents to what a homeowner would charge in rent to
hotel stays — climbed a record 8.2%.
On a monthly basis, housing costs helped deliver a larger-than-forecast 0.5%
gain in so-called core inflation, which excludes food and energy. That was
the biggest advance in five months and forces a tough choice for Federal
Reserve officials at next week’s policy meeting as they weigh still-rapid price
growth against turmoil in the banking sector.
Economists and traders see another quarter-point increase in interest rates
as the most likely scenario, which would extend the most-aggressive
tightening cycle in decades.
But the report from the Bureau of Labor Statistics on Tuesday showed
inflationary pressures continue to build outside of shelter, which accounts
for about a third of the overall CPI. The costs of recreation, household
furnishings and airfares also increased at concerning paces.
“Overall the breadth is still concerning,” said Sarah House, senior economist
at Wells Fargo & Co. If not for recent bank failures, “I think that would’ve
pointed the Fed towards that 50 basis-point hike given that there is still
tremendous work to do on the inflation front.”
MLIV Pulse Survey
How much more do you think the Fed is going to tighten, if at all? Click here to share
your views.

Economists, after looking at months of private data showing a slowdown in
housing prices as well as declining rents, continue to see shelter inflation
cooling in coming months. Because of the way this category is calculated,
there’s a delay between real-time measures and the CPI data.
Read more: Looking for CPI Rent Relief? Wait Until Mid-Year

Rents increased 0.3% in February from a month earlier, breaking a string of
five month-over-month declines and signaling a return to pre-pandemic
seasonality, according to a report from Apartment List. Rents were up 3%
from last February, the smallest year-over-year increase since April 2021, and
the gains are likely to continue slowing, the report said.
Stripping out energy and housing, services prices were up 0.5%, the most
since September, according to Bloomberg calculations. Fed Chair Jerome
Powell and his colleagues have stressed the importance of looking at the
metric when assessing the nation’s inflation trajectory, though they compute
it based on a separate index.
What Bloomberg Economics Says...
“February’s CPI report shows that inflation is not vanishing quickly, and
there remains a compelling need for the Fed to continue raising rates. A 25bp move would be appropriate at the March FOMC meeting, followed by a
couple more until the Fed reaches a terminal rate of 5.25%.”
— Anna Wong and Stuart Paul, economists
To read the full note, click here
Core services got a boost from consumers that have proven all too willing to
keep doling out cash for experiences and entertainment.
Airfares jumped 6.4% in February, the biggest increase since May and
snapping a string of monthly declines. The price of hotel stays popped by
the most since October. And recreational services — a category that includes
streaming services and concert tickets — jumped by the most since May
2020.
Adding to any angst at the Fed over price pressures, the disinflation in goods
prices has lost steam. Excluding food and energy, goods prices were
unchanged in February.
Used-car prices — a key driver of slower price growth in recent months —
dropped the most in nearly a year. Excluding used vehicles, core goods costs

continued to increase.
— With assistance from Patrick Clark

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

