Markets | Economics

Fed Seen Being Aggressive for Longer After US
Inflation Surprise
CPI excluding food and energy topped expectations in August
Fourth 75 bps hike in play in Nov., some see 100 bps next week

US Unmute
August Consumer Price Index Tops Forecasts

0:00
0:00
WATCH: US inflation was firmer than expected in August as the CPI increased 0.1% from July, after no change
in the prior month. Source: Bloomberg

By Jonnelle Marte and Steve Matthews
September 13, 2022 at 10:23 AM EDT
Updated on September 13, 2022 at 1:12 PM EDT
Save

Translate

4:00

This article is for subscribers only.

Federal Reserve officials face fresh pressure to extend rather than slow down
aggressive interest-rate increases after US inflation came in hotter than
forecast, potentially putting a fourth-straight 75 basis-point hike on the table.

While cheaper gasoline held US headline consumer inflation to a 0.1%
advance in August from the prior month, the core measure that excludes
volatile food and energy prices jumped 0.6% -- double economists’
expectations, Labor Department data showed Tuesday.
Some investors wagered this could push them to deliver a 100 basis-point
move when they meet next week, though that remained a minority view.

“This is a concerning report across the board for the Fed,” said Robert Dent,
senior US economist at Nomura Securities, which is predicting
a 100
basis-point hike next week. “Fed officials are going to be hard pressed to find
any silver lining in this morning’s data.”
Read More: First Hikes, Then Cuts: Fed Pricing Shows More Easing After
Peak
Investors now fully expect the Fed will lift its benchmark interest rate by 75
basis points for the third consecutive time when it meets Sept. 20-21. Traders
also upped their bets that the Fed will deliver a 75-basis point move again in
November, and investors now project the tightening cycle peaking around
4.3% as soon as March 2023.

With the data suggesting that price pressures are stubbornly high and broadbased, some saw the Fed being open to going even bigger next week.
“The CPI puts a 1% hike on table, and given the hawkish tone the Fed has
delivered, ups the ante they will do it,” said Diane Swonk, chief economist at
KPMG LLP.
Fed officials are working to quickly move rates into restrictive territory, a
level at which policy is slowing economic activity and not stimulating
demand. The consumer price index, which landed during the central bank’s
pre-meeting blackout period, is one of the last major economic reports
officials will receive before they gather next week.
“Today’s CPI report increases the odds that the Fed hikes by at least another
100 basis points over the November-to-December time frame,” said Neil
Dutta, head of US economic research at Renaissance Macro Research LLC.
“This takes the federal funds rate above 4% by year end.”
Some officials had already signaled they would support another big move
this month. St. Louis Fed President James Bullard said in an interview with
Bloomberg News on Thursday that he was “leaning more strongly” toward a
75 basis-point increase.
“Until I see a meaningful and persistent moderation of the rise in core
prices, I will support taking significant further steps to tighten monetary
policy,” Fed Governor Christopher Waller said Friday, after declaring that he
supported “another significant increase” for this month.
Read More: Fed Rush to Cool Inflation Set to Continue With Another Big
Hike
Chair Jerome Powell and his colleagues have said their rate decision will be
based on the “totality” of the economic data. An improvement in consumer
sentiment figures and a surprise pickup in job openings also point to
resilient households and consistently strong labor demand.

“We haven’t seen a tremendous amount of slowing in the real economy, and
that keeps these super-sized rate hikes in play,” Jay Bryson, global economist
at Wells Fargo & Co., said on Bloomberg Television.
Policy makers have said they would like to see inflation slow for several
months before they ease off on tightening. The CPI report could bolster the
argument of hawks on the FOMC that they have to do more to temper
demand and help cool price growth.
While the Fed targets a different measure of inflation known as the personal
consumption expenditures price index, and aims for 2% over the medium
term, officials review the CPI data for guidance on where prices are headed.
As policy makers take stronger action to halt inflation, they face greater risks
of pushing the US economy into a recession, said Mark Cabana, head of US
rates strategy at Bank of America Corp.
“The Fed is probably going to overdo it,” Cabana told Bloomberg Television
Tuesday, speaking before the CPI report was released. “We have seen them
turn very hawkish with the labor-market strength. We think that the Fed will
try and stick to this higher-for-longer mantra. That’s probably going to result
in a recession.”
(Updates with fresh market expectations starting in third paragraph)

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

