Economics | Inflation & Prices

US Inflation Seen Picking Up in April With Modest
Tariffs Impact

Unmute
What
to Expect From the April CPI Report

0:00
0:00
What to Expect From the April CPI Report

By Augusta Saraiva
May 12, 2025 at 7:00 PM EDT
Save

Translate

3:30

Takeaways by Bloomberg AI
US inflation is expected to have accelerated in April, with the consumer price
index rising 0.3% from March, according to a Bloomberg survey of
economists.
The impact of higher tariffs on Chinese goods is expected to be seen in the
report, although it may be limited due to many imported goods arriving in the
US before the new tariffs took effect.
Economists are also tracking services categories, such as travel-related
prices and shelter, which are seen as a barometer for changes in
discretionary spending.

US inflation likely accelerated in April after an unexpected cooldown the
previous month, with higher tariffs on Chinese goods in particular starting
to impact prices.
The consumer price index is seen rising 0.3% from March after declining in
the prior month, according to the median forecast in a Bloomberg survey of
economists. A core metric that excludes the often volatile food and energy
categories advanced at a similar pace, based on the consensus.
Most forecasters say Tuesday’s report by the Bureau of Labor Statistics will
show the first signs of the punishing tariffs implemented on China last
month as well as other duties. The impact may be limited because many
imported goods on US shelves last month arrived in the country before the
new levies came into effect.
“CPI categories that are China import-intensive — such as toys, shoes, and
apparel – may see modest inflation,” Bloomberg Economics forecasters led
by Anna Wong wrote in a note
Monday. “Retailers are finding it difficult
to pass on higher prices without suffering a sharp drop in demand — though
they’ll still try. If that effect prevails, then the net impact of tariffs will be less
inflationary than commonly thought.”
Going forward, forecasters are still assessing the recent agreement between
the US and China to temporary lower tariffs on each others’ products. It
could lead to a “catch-up period” when retailers rush to restock inventories
and items on US shelves are scarce, which could fuel consumer-price
growth, Bloomberg Economics wrote.
Goods Front-Loading
Bank of America economists estimate goods inflation excluding food and
energy commodities rose 0.1% in April after declining in the prior month.
“Tariffs should be a modest boost to goods prices this month, but larger
increases are in the pipeline,” Stephen Juneau and Jeseo Park wrote last
week — before the 90-day trade pact was announced. Within that category,
they anticipated higher car prices “due in part to front-loaded demand in
anticipation of higher prices from tariffs.”

Other economists anticipate the impact from the extra levies was limited.
The CPI report is expected to be “largely unaffected” by the tariffs President
Donald Trump announced on April 2, Julien Lafargue, chief market strategist
at Barclays Private Bank, said in a note Monday. That’s because exemptions
were granted for goods that were already on the way to the US, and
consumers and businesses rushed to buy products earlier in the year to
avoid tariffs.
“Both the Fed and global investors will still need to be a bit more patient
before they can properly assess the impact of the trade uncertainty on
consumer prices,” Lafargue said.
On the groceries front, economists at Morgan Stanley and Pantheon
Macroeconomics noted a notable decline in egg prices — a key driver of food
inflation in the CPI data this year through March. A drop in bird flu cases
may have provided some relief.
Services Weakness
Economists and policymakers are closely tracking certain services categories
that are a barometer for changes in discretionary spending.
Citigroup Inc. economists say travel-related categories such as airfares and
car rental saw prices drop for another month. The price weakness reported
in March, and a further pullback in April, would support the view that travel
demand softened, economists Veronica Clark and Andrew Hollenhorst
wrote.
The shelter category — which includes rents and is the biggest by far in the
index — is seen cooling after a strong increase in March.
“Looking ahead, we still doubt the tariffs will prevent services inflation from
continuing to fade gradually, enabling the Fed to start easing policy again in
the second half of this year,” Pantheon Macroeconomics economists Samuel
Tombs and Oliver Allen wrote in a note Monday.

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

