Markets

Dollar Seen Winner as Markets Brace for Even Faster
US Inflation
Equity weakness, dollar strength to last some time: BlackRock
AllianceBernstein sees scope for further yield-curve inversion

Photographer: David Paul Morris/Bloomberg

By Tassia Sipahutar
July 13, 2022 at 1:05 AM EDT
Save

Translate

3:56

This article is for subscribers only.

The dollar has scope to extend gains and stocks are likely to keep falling if US
inflation data Wednesday show a further acceleration, according to
strategists.

Other predictions include further inversion of the US yield curve, renewed
weakness in the yen and the euro finally being pushed below parity with the
greenback.
The US consumer price index probably climbed to 8.8% in June on an
annual basis, from a 40-year high of 8.6% the previous month, according to
a Bloomberg survey of economists before the data is published at 8:30 a.m.
in Washington. The Bloomberg Dollar Spot Index has already gained 10%
this year.

Here are a selection of views from strategists and analysts:
BlackRock Investment Institute Asia Pacific investment strategist Ben Powell
Markets are going through a paradigm shift from a fairly loose policy era
with low inflation and low rates, to an inherently more volatile world
shaped by supply, he said on Bloomberg Television
It’s going to be a more challenging macro backdrop
“We think investors of all types now have to be a bit more nimble, and I
guess a bit more focused around selectivity, rather than just a broad buyany-dip-that-we-see mentality. Fundamentally, central banks are not

there for us in the way that they have been over much of the last several
decades”
US CPI print to come on Wednesday is likely to be high
The Fed will continue to stress its hawkishness to preserve credibility
Dollar strength and equity weakness may persist for some time
AllianceBernstein Holding LP co-head of Asia Pacific fixed income Brad
Gibson
The market needs more than one CPI print to show it’s peaking out and
rolling over, he said on Bloomberg Television. “We do expect that to
occur in the later stage of this year”
Market is expecting a headline CPI slightly above last month, but core
inflation might come down a bit. However, the situation will not be
enough for the bond market to react strongly to change its yield-curve
flattening bias for now
“It does feel like inflation this time is different to what we’ve experienced
in the last even two decades. That playbook of the yield curve getting
down to these levels and then potentially re-steepening may not be the
playbook”
There’s more room for the yield curve to invert further. With the rate
differentials, real yields, there is probably room for the dollar to
continue to appreciate
Pepperstone Group head of research Chris Weston
“A CPI print below 8.5% would get the rates bulls fired up, with bond
yields down hard, subsequently, I’d imagine (in this scenario) the dollar
drops universally, crypto goes up 5%+, Nasdaq 100 +2.5% to 3%, and gold
+1.5%, he wrote in a research note
Conversely, a number above 9% could validate the market’s long US
dollar position and reinforce the notion that inflation is going to be high
for the rest of the calendar year

“It should take USD/JPY firmly back above 137, EUR/USD below parity
and see commodities under pressure”
Banrion Capital Management founder and president Shana Sissel
Market reaction will be negative if US consumer prices come out slightly
higher than expected, but not necessarily with the same negativity in the
last quarter, she said on Bloomberg Television
The market will not “freak out” because of the already existing negative
sentiment
“I just think there’s overly negative sentiment that we have. I think we’ve
gotten overdone with the negative sentiment at this point”
In-line or better-than-expected numbers will have the potentials to drive
the market upwards. The markets are expecting bad inflation numbers,
but signs of easing are showing in commodities
TD Securities team including global head of rates strategy Priya Misra
High headline inflation is likely to move two-year Treasury InflationProtected Security break evens higher
“We have doubled down on our long position as we look for near-term
inflation to remain elevated”
TD remains long 30-year real rates as the market pencils in greater risk
of Fed rate hikes slowing growth momentum
— With assistance from Shery Ahn and Haidi Lun

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey

Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

