Markets

Gold Slips as Traders Weigh Fed Rate Path Over
Easing Inflation
US PPI fell in July for first time in more than two years
Two Fed officials still see interest-rate hikes into 2023

By Yvonne Yue Li
August 10, 2022 at 8:42 PM EDT
Updated on August 11, 2022 at 3:34 PM EDT
Save

Translate

1:56

This article is for subscribers only.

Gold gave up early gains with the dollar paring most losses as traders
assessed the Federal Reserve’s path of monetary tightening after another
report showed US inflation is easing.
A key measure of US producer prices unexpectedly fell in July for the first
time in more than two years, largely reflecting a drop in energy costs and
representing a welcome moderation in inflationary pressures. The Labor
Department data followed Wednesday’s release that showed the US
consumer price index decelerated by more than expected in July, with
traders paring bets on tightening. US jobless claims also came in lower than
expected on Thursday, painting a favorable picture of the health of the
economy.
“US producer prices confirmed Wall Street’s belief that inflation is cooling,”
said Ed Moya, senior market analyst at Oanda. “The dollar is in freefall as
Fed rate hike expectations continue to dip, which is good news for all
commodities, especially gold.”

Still, two Fed officials responded to Wednesday’s softening inflation by
saying it doesn’t change the central bank’s path toward even higher interest
rates. Minneapolis Fed President Neel Kashkari said he wants the
benchmark rate at 3.9% by the end of this year and at 4.4% by the end of
2023, adding that it wasn’t realistic to conclude the Fed will start cutting
early next year.
His counterpart in Chicago, Charles Evans, said inflation remains
“unacceptably high” and that he expects “that we will be increasing rates
the rest of this year and into next year to make sure inflation gets back to our
2% objective.”
Spot gold fell 0.2% to $1,788.27 an ounce as of 3:33 p.m. in New York, after
earlier fluctuating between gains and losses. Bullion for December delivery
slipped 0.4% to settle at $1,807.20 on the Comex. The Bloomberg Dollar Spot
Index weakened 0.1%. Silver fell, while platinum and palladium climbed.
— With assistance from Eddie Spence and Ranjeetha Pakiam

Save
Contact us:

Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

