Markets

European Stocks Rise as Investors Assess US
Inflation Data

Trading data on a digital board. Photographer: Nathan Laine/Bloomberg

By Michael Msika
August 13, 2024 at 3:20 AM EDT
Updated on August 13, 2024 at 11:47 AM EDT
Save

Translate

2:58

This article is for subscribers only.

European stocks rose after swinging between modest gains and losses, as
investors assessed a smaller-than-expected rise in US producer prices for
clues on the health of the economy.
The Stoxx Europe 600 Index rose 0.5% by the close in London, extending
gains following the data, showing the first decline in services costs this year

amid an ongoing moderation in inflationary pressures.
Defensive equities outperformed with health care, utilities and real estate
leading gains, while energy and mining stocks dropped the most. Oil
slipped, breaking a five-day streak of gains, as traders weighed concerns
about an escalation in the Middle East conflict against the prospect of a
potential crude surplus.
Sentiment remains cautious with a gauge showing investor confidence in
Germany’s economy plummeted to its lowest level since January. A cut in
Home Depot Inc.’s guidance

also fueled worries about the broader

economy. In the UK, the economic picture was more positive as
unemployment fell unexpectedly after companies hired at the strongest
pace since November.

There is less optimism around European markets, according to the latest
Bank of America Corp. fund manager survey. About 48% of European
investors now expect downside for earnings in response to slowing growth
and fading inflation, compared with an 18% reading in July.
European stocks clawed back nearly half of their August losses last week,
with technical indicators now pointing to some recovery ahead. Yet,
volatility could return and US consumer inflation due Wednesday and initial

jobless claims Thursday will be scanned for further clues as to how the
economy is holding up. The European benchmark gauge is still down more
than 3% this month because of worries that the slowing US economy could
tip into recession.

Signed
Sign Up
Up
By continuing, I agree to the Privacy Policy and Terms of Service.

“As the market anticipates tomorrow’s inflation data, there is a strong
likelihood that this information will be interpreted as a key signal of
economic growth,” said Florian Ielpo, head of macro research at Lombard
Odier Asset Management. “Consequently, a lower-than-expected inflation
figure could weigh on equity valuations and bond spreads, when a higherthan-expected number could help dismiss recession fears.”
Among individual movers, HelloFresh SE jumped as much as 23% after
second-quarter earnings beat the average analyst estimate. Swiss health
diagnostics Tecan Group AG sank 19% as it posted lower profit for the first
half and cut its outlook.
For more on equity markets:
Buying Luxury

Stocks Has Become a Contrarian Trade: Taking Stock

M&A Watch

Europe: Comarch, Nobian, Santhera, Oscar Properties

Autumn IPO

Plans On Track to Defy Volatility Spike: ECM Watch

US Stock

Futures Unchanged; BuzzFeed, Rumble Gain

Bharti Calling: The London Rush
You want more news on this market? Click here for a curated First Word
channel of actionable news from Bloomberg and select sources. It can be
customized to your preferences by clicking into Actions on the toolbar or

hitting the HELP key for assistance. To subscribe to a daily list of European
analyst rating changes, click here.
— With assistance from Sagarika Jaisinghani
This story was produced with the assistance of Bloomberg Automation.

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

