Markets

European Stocks Trim Gains on US Inflation Pickup;
Inditex Rises

By Julien Ponthus
September 11, 2024 at 3:30 AM EDT
Updated on September 11, 2024 at 12:02 PM EDT
Save

Translate

2:52

This article is for subscribers only.

European stocks trimmed earlier gains after underlying US inflation
unexpectedly picked up in August, undercutting the chances of an outsize
Federal Reserve interest-rate cut next week.
The Stoxx Europe 600 Index was flat by the close in London, paring earlier
gains of as much as 0.5%. The so-called core consumer price index — which
excludes food and energy costs — increased 0.3% from July and 3.2% from a
year ago, Bureau of Labor Statistics figures showed Wednesday.
“This data somewhat dents expectations on a 50-basis-points rate cut next
week,” said Amelie Derambure, senior multi-asset portfolio manager at
Amundi in Paris. “The big picture, however, is today’s data doesn’t change
the direction of travel, which is good.”
Rates-sensitive stocks, like real estate, lagged. Retailers advanced after Zaraowner Inditex SA reported that sales were rising at the start of the third
quarter. Meanwhile, Commerzbank AG rallied after UniCredit SpA built a 9%
stake and said it plans to enter talks with the lender.
Rentokil Initial Plc was among the worst performers, plunging as much as
21%, after the pest control business issued a surprise downgrade to its
growth expectations in North America.

Europe’s benchmark index has stumbled this month after an August
rebound as concerns about global growth weighed on stocks linked to the
economic cycle and commodities such as oil. The European Central Bank is
expected to cut rates at its meeting on Thursday for a second time this cycle
as the region’s economy struggles to maintain growth momentum.

Investors were also monitoring developments in the US presidential race.
Democratic candidate Kamala Harris and Republican nominee Donald
Trump sparred through their first debate on Tuesday, with the former
president often on the defensive over abortion rights, the Jan. 6 insurrection
and on foreign policy.
“What you see across markets makes sense with the idea that Harris won the
debate, especially with the endorsement of Taylor Swift,” said Alexandre
Baradez, chief market analyst at IG in Paris.
Investors expect a Trump administration to be more prone to fueling
inflation through tax cuts and tariffs on imported goods, while a Harris
presidency would be more favorable to US traditional partners, such as the
European Union, Baradez said.
For more on equity markets:

Confidence in

the Bull Market Has Been Eroded: Taking Stock

M&A Watch

Europe: Sampo’s Deal; Unicredit Buys Commerzbank

Stake
Foreign Bids
US Stock

for UK Firms as Centamin Gets Offer: ECM Watch
Futures Fall; Cantaloupe Inc Falls

A Literal Gold Mine: The London Rush
You want more news on this market? Click here for a curated First Word
channel of actionable news from Bloomberg and select sources. It can be
customized to your preferences by clicking into Actions on the toolbar or
hitting the HELP key for assistance. To subscribe to a daily list of European
analyst rating changes, click here.
— With assistance from Brandon Harden
This story was produced with the assistance of Bloomberg Automation.

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

