Economics | Eco Week Ahead

Data Fog Intensifying for Fed as Shutdown Delays US
Inflation Numbers

A shopper pushes a cart at a grocery store in Bergenfield, New Jersey. Photographer: Kena
Betancur/Bloomberg

By Vince Golle and Craig Stirling
November 8, 2025 at 4:00 PM EST
Updated on November 9, 2025 at 1:23 PM EST
Save

Translate

Takeaways by Bloomberg AI
The US government shutdown has delayed the release of two monthly jobs
reports and may also impact the release of a key inflation snapshot, creating a
data fog for the Federal Reserve.
The absence of official reports on inflation and the job market will prolong the
debate about whether another rate cut is needed at the Fed's December
meeting, with some economists predicting that October's figures would have
supported a rate cut.

Fed officials will have to rely on retroactive surveys and private-sector reports
to inform their decisions, with several appearances by Fed officials in the
coming week, including John Williams, Raphael Bostic, Stephen Miran, and
Alberto Musalem, being closely watched by investors.

Two monthly jobs reports have fallen victim to the longest US government
shutdown and a key inflation snapshot due in the coming week is also in
jeopardy, illustrating a thickening data fog for a Federal Reserve that’s the
most divided in recent memory.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics was scheduled to report the October
consumer price index on Thursday, yet the government’s closure has not
only delayed its release but also halted in-person data collection. It’s
increasingly likely the BLS will forgo issuing an October CPI report
altogether.
The absence of official reports that inform policymakers about the trajectory
of inflation and the job market will prolong a debate about whether another
rate cut is needed at the Fed’s December meeting. While central bankers had
the September CPI in time for their last meeting, they didn’t have an
updated jobs report.
Assuming the government reopens in the coming weeks and statistics start
moving again, Fed officials will still be confronted with data compiled via
retroactive surveys and other methods — if the figures are published at all.
And while several private-sector reports on the job market are helping to fill
the void of official data, alternatives to government inflation figures are
harder to come by and more limited in scope.
The CPI and its core measure, which excludes more volatile food and energy
costs, each rose a lower-than-forecast 3% in September from a year ago.
Alternative measures, like the Cleveland Fed’s “nowcast” CPI, suggest a
similar outcome for October.
What Bloomberg Economics Says:
“Even if the government were to reopen, it’s unlikely the Bureau of Labor
Statistics would be able to collect and process data for both the October
and November CPI reports ahead of the December FOMC meeting. We

think October’s figures would have greenlit a rate cut at the final meeting of
the year.”
— Anna Wong, Stuart Paul, Estelle Ou, Eliza Winger, Chris G. Collins and
Troy Durie, economists. For full analysis, click here
Still, following the Fed’s rate reduction in October, Chair Jerome Powell said
a December cut wasn’t assured. For policymakers focused on the potential
for inflation to re-accelerate, the absence of official figures likely gives them
further reason to hold next month.
And while market odds still favor a December rate reduction, investors will
monitor several appearances in the coming week by Fed officials, including
John Williams, Raphael Bostic, Stephen Miran and Alberto Musalem.
In a Financial Times interview published Sunday, Williams — who heads the
New York Fed — said that next rate decision is “really a balancing act.”
While “inflation is high, and it’s not showing signs of coming down right
now,” the US economy “is showing some resilience,” he told the newspaper.
For more, read Bloomberg Economics’ full Week Ahead for the US
Turning north, the Bank of Canada will release a summary of the
deliberations behind its October rate cut, shedding light on why it deemed
borrowing costs to be at “about the right level” as long as the economy and
inflation evolve as expected. Prime Minister Mark Carney may announce a
second tranche of fast-tracked major projects that aim to diversify trade and
stoke growth.
Elsewhere, Chinese production and retail data, UK wage and growth
numbers, and central bank meeting minutes from Japan to Sweden will be
among the highlights.
Click here for what happened in the past week, and below is our wrap of
what’s coming up in the global economy.

Asia
The week in Asia began Sunday with data showing that China’s consumer
prices unexpectedly increased in October, as holidays during the month
boosted travel, food and transport demand.
India publishes price data Wednesday that economists predict will show
inflation slowing in October to 0.4% year on year, boosting the case for the
Reserve Bank of India to resume rate cuts when it sets policy in December.
Australia releases two key sentiment indexes on Tuesday, the Westpac
Consumer Confidence gauge for November and the NAB Business
Confidence index for October.
Two days later, Canberra issues labor statistics that will show whether
employment growth continued to slow and unemployment nudged higher in
October, both of which would encourage the Reserve Bank of Australia to
consider resuming rate cuts on Dec. 9.
India’s trade statistics for October may be released, and the week ends with
China’s monthly data blast that will likely underscore fragility in domestic
demand. Growth in retail sales and industrial output both probably slowed
in October, while the slide in investment in fixed assets and property
accelerated.
Also on Friday, New Zealand releases its manufacturing PMI for October
after the gauge was slightly contractionary in the previous two months.
No central bank decisions are scheduled in Asia in the coming week, but the
Bank of Japan on Monday will release the summary of opinions from its
October meeting, the second straight gathering that featured two dissenters
calling for a rate hike. The record may give an indication if authorities are
leaning toward an increase in December, as about half of surveyed
economists predict.
For more, read Bloomberg Economics’ full Week Ahead for Asia
Europe, Middle East, Africa

Upcoming data

will inform UK officials on the economic backdrop

following the Bank of England’s decision on Thursday to keep rates on hold
while teeing up a cut for December. On Tuesday, labor statistics will
probably show wage growth slowed slightly in the third quarter, while gross
domestic product numbers two days later may point to a moderate
weakening in growth in the same period.
BOE appearances will also draw attention. Deputy Governor Clare
Lombardelli, policymaker Megan Greene and chief economist Huw Pill — all
of whom voted in the majority for no change in rates — will speak on
successive days, starting on Monday.
Over in the euro zone

, remarks from several European Central Bank

officials are on the calendar, including Executive Board members Isabel
Schnabel and Luis de Guindos on Wednesday. The week will be quieter for
data, with highlights to include Germany’s ZEW investor confidence on
Tuesday and eurozone industrial production two days later.
The Nordics have a busy few days ahead following decisions by the Riksbank
and Norges Bank to keep borrowing costs unchanged.
In Sweden, minutes of its monetary meeting will be published on Tuesday,
and the Riksbank will release its financial stability report on Thursday.
Governor Erik Thedeen speaks in Frankfurt the following day.
Norwegian inflation figures are due on Monday, Norges Bank Governor Ida
Wolden Bache is scheduled to appear in Amsterdam the next day, and the
central bank’s own financial stability report is down for Wednesday.
For more, read Bloomberg Economics’ full Week Ahead for EMEA
Turning south, economists will watch how a mid-October fuel price hike
filters through to inflation in Egypt early in the week. On Friday, Israel’s rate
of annual price growth is expected to remain at 2.5% in October, keeping
policymakers cautious about easing monetary policy.

Russian policymakers will watch October inflation data for evidence that it
remains on a downward trend, after the central bank warned that elevated
expectations may weigh on prospects for more rate cuts. Analysts expect
GDP data to show that Russia’s economy continued to cool in the third
quarter.
It’s a big week for public finances in Africa. On Wednesday, South African
Finance Minister Enoch Godongwana will deliver his medium-term budget
in Cape Town, to be watched for signs of fiscal restraint as the government
works to stabilize debt and reassure markets ahead of next year’s local
elections.
A tax windfall and spending restraint may help the National Treasury
narrow deficit forecasts, but pressures to fund state companies and expand
social programs risk eroding those gains and could weigh on the rand if
fiscal consolidation falters.
On Thursday, Ghana’s Finance Minister Cassiel Ato Forson presents the
second annual budget under President John Mahama — a key gauge of the
administration’s economic direction. Investors will assess whether Forson
maintains fiscal discipline under the International Monetary Fund program,
and how he plans to finance the deficit.
A few monetary decisions are on the calendar in the wider region:
On Monday, Uganda is expected to keep its rate unchanged at 9.75% for a
fifth consecutive meeting as policymakers seek more clarity on the
inflation outlook.
Two days later in Zambia, the central bank may cut its benchmark after
holding it at 14.5% for two straight meetings. Inflation is easing, and the
kwacha has strengthened nearly 23% against the dollar this year.
Romania’s central bank is expected to hold its interest rate at 6.5%,
waiting for a temporary spike in inflation to ease. Governor Mugur
Isarescu will likely present the quarterly inflation report in the following
days.

Serbia’s central bank will decide the following day whether to resume
easing after more than a year of keeping borrowing costs on hold.
Latin America
Banco Central do Brasil early Tuesday posts the minutes of its Nov. 4-5 rate
meeting, where the board, led by Governor Gabriel Galipolo, kept the key
rate at a near two-decade high of 15%.
The minutes are unlikely to offer much in the way of guidance on the big
question — that is, could BCB consider a rate cut in December — regardless of
the likely deceleration in October’s inflation readings to be reported an hour
later.
Colombia’s October inflation data, if the early consensus holds up, may land
with a thud at the central bank and among investors, especially after
September’s bigger-than-expected rise.
The core print likely re-accelerated to top 5% yet again, while the headline
reading jumped closer to 5.5%, both well above BanRep’s 3% target.
The near-death experience for Argentina’s peso and economy ahead of the
Oct. 26 mid-terms — coupled with expectations that devaluation has to be on
the menu — likely raised the temperature on October consumer price data,
due on Wednesday. Analysts’ year-end estimates have crept back up over
30%.
In Peru, policymakers led by central bank chief Julio Velarde are expected to
hold at 4.25% for a second straight meeting. Guidance offered in the October
meeting’s post-decision statement suggests that a line may have been drawn
under the BCRP’s stop-and-go, two-year easing cycle.
The minutes of Banco Central de Chile’s Oct. 28 rate hold may not break
much new ground: the bank hasn’t yet arrived at the terminal rate of its
easing cycle, and is in a data-dependent mode.
For more, read Bloomberg Economics’ full Week Ahead for Latin America

— With assistance from Laura Dhillon Kane, Mark Evans, Ros Krasny, Piotr
Skolimowski, Anthony Halpin, Beril Akman, Brian Fowler, Monique Vanek, and
Robert Jameson
(Updates with Williams starting in eighth paragraph)

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

