Markets | Commodities

Base Metals Pare Gains After CPI Data Cools Odds of
Big Fed Cut

A worker supervises a furnace at a copper plant in Serbia. Photographer: Oliver Bunic/Bloomberg

By Bloomberg News
September 10, 2024 at 11:47 PM EDT
Updated on September 11, 2024 at 10:03 AM EDT
Save

Translate

1:37

This article is for subscribers only.

Copper and other base metals pared earlier gains after underlying US
inflation unexpectedly picked up in August, undercutting the chances of an
outsize Federal Reserve interest-rate cut next week.

The core consumer price index — which excludes food and energy costs and
is a preferred gauge for economists — increased 0.3% from July, the most in
four months, and 3.2% from a year ago, Bureau of Labor Statistics figures
showed Wednesday.
While the data is unlikely to deter the Federal Reserve from cutting interest
rates next week, it makes an outsized reduction —— a 50 basis point cut ——
less likely than a 25 basis point reduction. Treasury yields pushed higher
while the dollar pared early losses after the print, and bullion edged lower.
As investors awaited the data earlier today, there were across-the-board
gains on the London Metal Exchange, with copper reaching a high of $9,151 a
ton. Copper has been edging higher since sinking below $9,000 a ton earlier
this month, with traders weighing some signs of a pick-up in Chinese
demand against concerns over global growth, uncertainties around
monetary policy and the looming US presidential election.
Markets were also digesting the outcome of the first debate between US
presidential candidates, Kamala Harris and Donald Trump, with the odds of
victory for the former rising after the match-up. Citigroup Inc. has argued
that Trump’s threat of tougher tariffs will weigh on metals before the
November vote.
Copper traded 0.6% higher at $9,079 a ton by 3:01 p.m in London, while
aluminum was up 1.3% and tin added 1.1%.

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters

Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

