Economics

US Consumer Inflation Expectations Hold Steady in
New York Fed Survey

Shoppers in New York in November. Photographer: Adam Gray/Bloomberg

By Maria Eloisa Capurro
December 8, 2025 at 11:00 AM EST
Updated on December 8, 2025 at 11:39 AM EST
Save

Translate

1:28

US consumer inflation expectations were stable in November while
perceptions about job prospects improved, according to a survey from the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Expected inflation a year ahead was little changed at 3.2% last month, while
expected inflation three and five years ahead remained at 3%, according to
median responses in the New York Fed’s monthly Survey of Consumer

Expectations, published Monday. The perceived probability of losing one’s
job fell to 13.8%, marking the lowest reading this year.
Fed officials are widely expected to cut their benchmark interest rate for a
third straight time on Wednesday at the conclusion of a two-day policy
meeting, in a bid to safeguard against worsening labor market conditions.
Still, several officials have also voiced concerns that tariffs could result in
long-lasting price increases, and are closely following estimates of expected
inflation.
The New York Fed survey showed consumers largely were more optimistic
about the labor market in November than a month earlier, marking down
the chances of a higher unemployment rate a year from now and reporting
better odds of finding a job if they were to lose theirs.
But with job prospects still worse than last year and inflation still elevated, a
greater share of households also reported deterioration in their personal
finances. The percentage of respondents saying their current financial
situation was worse than a year ago rose to 39%, the highest in two years.
Read More: Powell’s Vote-Gathering Challenge Shows Test for Next Fed Chair
— With assistance from Vince Golle
(Updates with chart.)

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters

Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

