Wealth | Economics

US Inflation Nearer 1980 Peak Than Thought,
Summers Group Says
Analysis shows June 1980 core CPI was 9.1%, not 13.6%
Paper suggests more pain may be needed to stem inflation now

TheUnmute
Picture is Still a Very Stretched Economy: Summers

0:01
0:01
The Picture is Still a Very Stretched Economy: Summers

By Molly Smith
June 6, 2022 at 10:26 AM EDT
Save

Translate

2:55

This article is for subscribers only.

US inflation is running even closer today to its 1980 peak, fresh analysis of
historical price data shows, suggesting to the authors of the study that the
Federal Reserve’s task of bringing price gains back to its target is similar in
scale to that of then-Chair Paul Volcker.

A group of economists including former Treasury Secretary Lawrence
Summers recalculated historical readings for the consumer price index to
apply modern-day spending patterns, especially for housing.
After adjustments, the figures showed that core inflation ran at an estimated
9.1% in June 1980 -- versus the reported peak of 13.6%, the paper by
economists Marijn A. Bolhuis, Judd N. L. Cramer and Summers said.
That means that the aggressive monetary tightening that Volcker
implemented in the early 1980s brought the core inflation rate down by 5
percentage points -- not by the 11 points in the official annals. And that in
turn suggests the Fed’s job today is of a scale closer than previously thought
to Volcker’s -- which involved a deep recession.
Summers, a Harvard University professor, is a paid contributor to
Bloomberg Television.
In April, the core CPI rose 6.2%. Fed policy makers target a 2% inflation rate,
although that’s tied to a separate gauge of prices that averages somewhat less
than CPI. Economists forecast the May core CPI figure, due Friday from the
Bureau of Labor Statistics, at 5.9%.
Volcker Scale
“To return to 2% core CPI inflation today will thus require nearly the same
amount of disinflation as achieved under Chairman Volcker,” the researchers
said in the paper published by the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Read more: Summers Sees Signs Fed Tightening Is Having Impact on US
Economy
The findings may be concerning for Fed Chair Jerome Powell and his
colleagues, who are trying to lower inflation without triggering a surge in
unemployment like Volcker did.
Volcker’s monetary tightening sent the federal funds rate up about 10
percentage points, to a peak of 20% in the early 1980s. Today, the target
range is 0.75% to 1%.

The research shows similar results for the inflation experienced in the years
following World War II. When placing less weight on transitory goods
components -- especially food and apparel -- the peak of core CPI inflation in
June 1951 fell from 7.2% to 5%, and the peak of headline CPI inflation
dropped from 9.4% to 3.3%, according to the paper.
“There have been important methodological changes in the Consumer Price
Index (CPI) over time,” the group wrote. “These distort comparisons of
inflation from different periods.”
The panel of economists argued that the fresh look at data from the 1950s
and 1980s “serve as a caution against overly optimistic forecasts of an
inexpensive disinflation in the current cycle -- the disinflation that needs to
be achieved now is large by historical standards.”

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

