Economics | Central Banks

Fed’s Hammack Is Still Worried About Outlook for US
Inflation

Unmute

Ad

0:15

Fed’s Hammack Is Concerned About Inflation Expectations

By Craig Stirling and Jonnelle Marte
September 29, 2025 at 4:48 AM EDT
Updated on September 29, 2025 at 9:33 AM EDT
Save

Translate

3:04

Takeaways by Bloomberg AI
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland President Beth Hammack said inflation
that could stay above target until 2028 is a concern for her as she argues
against interest-rate cuts.
Hammack observed that the central bank has missed its 2% goal for more
than 4 1/2 years, and is likely to keep doing so for some time, with pressure in
inflation in the headline, core, and services.
Hammack said she views the current stance of policy as “mildly restrictive,”
and that she has “one of the higher estimates of neutral on the committee,”
and would only want to go into an accommodative stance if she saw a more
material weakening on the horizon.

Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland President Beth Hammack said inflation
that could stay above target until 2028 is a concern for her as she argues
against interest-rate cuts.
Speaking in an interview with CNBC from Frankfurt, the policymaker
observed that the central bank has missed its 2% goal for more than 4 1/2
years, and is likely to keep doing so for some time.
“I continue to see that we have pressure in inflation, both in the headline, in
the core, and particularly where I’m worried about it is, I’m seeing it in
services,” Hammack said. “My forecast is that we’re going to remain above
target for probably the next one to two years, and not really getting back
down to our objective of 2% until the end of 2027 or early 2028.”
While a number of Fed officials have acknowledged the impact of tariffs on
prices has so far been muted, Hammack remains cautious and suggested
that she doesn’t agree with colleagues who view the effect as a one-time
thing.
“I continue to be worried about where we are from an inflation perspective,”
she said. “I think we really need to maintain a restrictive stance for policy.”
Data released last week showed US personal spending rose in August by
more than forecast and underlying inflation pressures held steady.
Fed officials lowered their target range for the benchmark federal funds rate
by a quarter percentage point on Sept. 17, their first move since December
despite intense pressure from the Trump administration to cut rates.
Hammack said that she views the current stance of policy as “mildly
restrictive,” and that she has “one of the higher estimates of neutral on the
committee.”
“To me we’re a short distance from getting to neutral,” she said. “I would
only want to go into an accommodative stance if I saw a more material
weakening on the horizon and I’m not seeing that.”

US policymakers will next gather Oct. 28-29. Investors in fed funds futures
contracts see about a 90% chance of another quarter-point reduction.
Speaking during a panel later on Monday, Hammack said the price effects
from tariffs had been more muted than expected, but that she anticipated
more price increases as businesses worked through inventories and passed
more tariff costs on to customers. Hammack also said a longer pass through
period might increase the risk of the extra inflation persisting.
“If it’s transitory, and it’s transitory but it takes two years for the full impact
to come through, is that transitory?” Hammack said at a conference jointly
hosted by the European Central Bank and the Cleveland Fed. “How do you
think about that, in terms of what that’s going to do to individuals,
businesses, inflation expectations and their experience?”
Fed Independence
Questioned on Fed independence during the CNBC interview, Hammack
said that much of the dialogue surrounding the central bank and what it
should do at present is actually “pretty normal” given that previous
governments have also commented on policy.
Even so, “having a governor who is on leave from an administration position
hasn’t happened before, and having the president trying to unseat a
governor hasn’t happened before,” she said.
Hammack was asked about the prospect of a government shutdown, with a
deadline looming this week.
“I would expect that it would have some amount of drag on GDP the longer
that a shutdown lasts,” she said. “We’ll need to watch have to see what those
impacts look like long term, and how this one plays out.”
(Updates with Hammack comments from conference from 12th paragraph.)

Save

Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

