Economics | Central Banks

Exports and Household Spending to Blame for
Germany’s Stagnation

Household spending and exports weighed on Germany’s output. Photographer: Maria Feck/Bloomberg

By Mark Schroers
November 25, 2025 at 2:14 AM EST
Save

Translate

2:03

Takeaways by Bloomberg AI
Trade and private consumption were to blame for Germany’s third-quarter
stagnation, a period that saw the European Union enter into a tariff agreement
with the US.
Household spending and exports weighed on output, while investment and
government expenditure made positive contributions.
Higher government spending on defense and infrastructure should buoy
activity in the coming years, along with lower interest rates.

Trade and private consumption were to blame for Germany’s third-quarter
stagnation, a period that saw the European Union enter into a tariff
agreement with the US.
Third-quarter gross domestic product was unchanged from the previous
three months, data from statistics office showed Tuesday, confirming an
initial estimate. Household spending and exports weighed on output, while
investment and government expenditure made positive contributions.
“Economic activity was hampered in the third quarter by weak exports,
while investments increased slightly,” Destatis President Ruth Brand said in a
statement.
Europe’s largest economy is struggling to emerge from a slump that saw
gross domestic product fall in 2023 and 2024. It’s particularly vulnerable to
higher US levies and weak global demand, and is suffering from longerstanding structural problems from excessive red tape to a lack of skilled
workers.
While President Donald Trump and European Commission President Ursula
von der Leyen agreed on a trade pact in late July, that still leaves Germany’s
export-heavy economy with higher levies than before the former took office
in January.
However, higher government spending on defense and infrastructure should
buoy activity in the coming years, along with lower interest rates. Chancellor
Friedrich Merz’s ruling coalition expects GDP to rise 1.3% in 2026 and 1.4%
and 2027, after inching up 0.2% this year.
The Bundesbank has said the economy may return to growth in the final
three months of 2025, with exports and industry set to stabilize. But a poll
Monday showed business confidence unexpectedly dipped, while there are
fears new public debt will just plug budget holes, not finance additional
investments.
“Higher government spending for more public investment is one thing,”
Bundesbank President Joachim Nagel said Monday. “However, this should

definitely be accompanied by reforms that sustainably strengthen Germany
as a business location.”
Read More on Germany’s Economy:
German Business Outlook Unexpectedly Slips, Clouding Rebound
Germany on Track for Growth in Fourth Quarter, Bundesbank Says
German Private-Sector Growth Slows as Industry Suffers Setback

— With assistance from Kristian Siedenburg, Harumi Ichikura, and Joel Rinneby

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

