Markets

European Stocks Rally on Bets that US Inflation Data
Will Cool

Unmute
Bitcoin
Extends Rally as Ethereum Upgrade Looms

0:01
0:01
Bitcoin Extends Rally as Ethereum Upgrade Looms

By Sagarika Jaisinghani
September 12, 2022 at 3:03 AM EDT
Updated on September 12, 2022 at 11:43 AM EDT
Save

Translate

3:07

This article is for subscribers only.

European stocks rose for a third day on Monday, lifted by expectations that
cooling inflation could prompt the Federal Reserve and other central banks
to slow down the pace of policy tightening.
The Stoxx Europe 600 Index closed 1.8% higher, marking its biggest threeday rally in nearly two months. The benchmark gauge rose above its 50-day
moving average for the first time this month -- considered a positive
technical signal that often heralds a rebound.

Retailers outperformed with a gain of 4.5%, while automakers and banks
rose more than 3% each. Telecoms, food and healthcare underperformed.
The index had ended Friday with its first weekly gain in four, a day after the
European Central Bank hiked rates and reassured investors that it was
focused on taming scorching inflation. So far this month, the European
benchmark is up about 3%, having lost more than 5% in August.

Fuel-Shortage Risks Make Investors Bullish on Energy: MLIV Pulse
“If the US data is soft enough, or ideally softer than expected, equities will
likely continue pushing higher this week as well,” said Ipek Ozkardeskaya,
senior analyst at Swissquote Bank. “If, however, the data is not as soft as
expected, or worse, if we see a higher figure than last month’s read, then last
week’s gains will likely be quickly given back.”

Meanwhile, lower valuations following the August selloff have enticed
investors to the Stoxx 600. But while the forward 12-month price-to-earnings
ratio on index constituents is now below a long-term average, strategists at
Goldman Sachs Group Inc. say that’s not enough
to fuel a sustained
market rally, given the threat of an economic recession.
Mark Haefele, chief investment officer at UBS Global Wealth Management,
sees limited potential for equity gains out to June 2023, given the uncertain
inflation outlook.
“While we expect the August CPI release to provide further evidence that US
inflation is easing, peak inflation has not yet been reached in the Eurozone
or UK,” Haefele wrote in a note. “And we believe the Fed will require at least
three months of reassuring inflation data—along with evidence of a cooling
labor market—before considering softening its tone.”
Among individual movers, Orpea SA slumped

to its lowest since 2005

and the most on record after the retirement-home operator warned earnings
would miss expectations. Thule Group AB sank

to its lowest since June

2020 after the Swedish bike, car and outdoor equipment manufacturer
issued a profit warning. Tate & Lyle Plc slipped
after Jefferies
downgraded the stock on increasing cost pressures in Europe.

For more on equity markets:
Battered Retailers
M&A Watch
U.S. Stock

Could Be Worth Another Look: Taking Stock

Europe: Credit Suisse, Carrefour, Yara, Ubisoft, EDPR
Futures Rise

Trickle of New Listings Hints at IPO Thaw: The London Rush
You want more news on this market? Click here for a curated First Word
channel of actionable news from Bloomberg and select sources. It can be
customized to your preferences by clicking into Actions on the toolbar or
hitting the HELP key for assistance.
This story was produced with the assistance of Bloomberg Automation.

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

