Markets

Gold Rises to Three-Week High as US Data Bolsters
Rate Cut Bets
Core CPI cools for first time in six months in relief for Fed
US retail sales stall after downward revisions in prior months

Unmute

Ad

0:14

The Gold Rush of 2024 Explained

By Yvonne Yue Li and William Clowes
May 14, 2024 at 8:23 PM EDT
Updated on May 15, 2024 at 11:41 AM EDT
Save

Translate

2:16

This article is for subscribers only.

Gold rose to the highest in more than three weeks after latest data showed
ebbing inflation and weak retail sales, reinforcing expectations that the
Federal Reserve will start cutting interest rates this year.

A measure of underlying US inflation cooled in April for the first time in six
months, with the so-called core consumer price index — which excludes
food and energy costs — increasing 0.3% from March, according to
government data released Wednesday. Separate data out Wednesday showed
retail sales stagnated in April, indicating high borrowing costs and mounting
debt are encouraging greater prudence among consumers.

Bloomberg
@business · Follow

For many investors, gold is looking hot right now. So is now
the time to invest in the precious metal? @akritiisharma
explains trib.al/PFn09yP
Watch on X

7:58 PM · Dec 5, 2023
13

Reply

Copy link
Read 5 replies

While the data provided some relief for policymakers looking to start cutting
interest rates this year, they also pointed to potential economic weakness
and sticky inflation, which would benefit gold as it’s a hedge against financial
stress and price pressures.

Still, for bullion to reach a fresh record, “we need more clarity on the
number of rate cuts given its potential positive impact on ETF demand, a
source of demand that has been absent since 2022,” said Ole Hansen, head
of commodity strategy at Saxo Bank AS.

Investors remain net sellers of gold exchange-traded funds so far this year,
with total holdings down 5.9%, according to data compiled by Bloomberg.
The precious metal has traded in a fairly narrow range over the last few
weeks, following a blistering rally that saw it reach a record high in midApril. Prices are up about 14% this year, with gains underpinned by central
bank buying, heightened geopolitical risks and consumer demand in China.
Bullion has gained despite the anticipated timing of the Fed’s pivot being
pushed back.
Spot gold rose 1.1% to $2,385.04 an ounce as of 11:25 a.m. in New York after
earlier increasing as much as 1.2%. The Bloomberg Dollar Spot Index edged
lower for a second day, which can also make bullion more attractive.
Platinum climbed as much as 2.4% to the highest in almost a year.
Copper prices on the London Metal Exchange were 1.2% higher at $10,234 a
ton after the data. Comex front-month copper futures were 0.2% lower, after
earlier rallying to a record high as a short squeeze gripped the market.

Read More: Copper Short Squeeze in NY Prompts Rush to Send Metal to US

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

