Markets

Oil Rises a Sixth Day as US Data Shows Inflation
Moderating
Chinese companies buying US crude after Beijing issues quota
WTI crude futures post longest run of gains since February

Unmute Currie Sees Oil at $110 by Q3 on China
Goldman’s

0:00
0:00
JPM's Malek Sees Oil in $100-$120 Range by 2H of 2023

By Julia Fanzeres
January 11, 2023 at 7:05 PM EST
Updated on January 12, 2023 at 3:14 PM EST
Save

Translate

1:46

This article is for subscribers only.

Growing confidence in China’s recovery and mounting evidence of cooling
US inflation buoyed crude prices for a sixth day.
West Texas Intermediate rose 1.3% to settle above $78 a barrel for the longest
run of daily gains since February. US consumer prices fell 0.1% in December,

the first monthly decline since 2020. The report bolstered risky assets with
traders betting the Federal Reserve will slow the pace of rate hikes as
inflation cools.
The brighter US outlook adds to growing optimism over China’s rebound.
Beijing issued a bumper batch of import quotas this week and Chinese oil
companies have stepped up purchases of US and West African grades in
recent days.

Oil’s recent push higher has gathered steam after a rocky start to the year.
Analysts remain bullish on the longer-term outlook. Goldman Sachs Group
Inc. said on Wednesday that it expects crude to hit $110 by the third quarter
if China’s economy successfully reopens, while Morgan Stanley sees a tighter
second half to the year.
Prices:
WTI for February delivery rose 98 cents to settle at $78.39 in New York.
Brent for March was rose $1.36 to settle at $84.03.

There are also tentative signs that trading activity has picked up in the new
year. Open interest

across the main oil-futures contracts this week

climbed to the highest level since October. Low levels of futures holdings
had been a driver of market volatility in recent months.
Related coverage:
Russia Oil-Price Cap Defies Skeptics With So Far, So Good Start
BP Picks Oliver Stanford as New Head of US Crude Oil Trading
The Fiendish Task of Capping the Price of Russian Fuels

MLIV Pulse Survey
Will Europe avoid an energy crisis and benefit from China’s reopening? Share your
views here.

Elements, Bloomberg’s daily energy and commodities newsletter, is now
available. Sign up here.

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

