Economics | Indicators

Charting the Global Economy: BOJ Shocks; US
Inflation Cools

By Molly Smith and Vince Golle
December 24, 2022 at 5:00 AM EST
Save

Translate

4:28

This article is for subscribers only.

Bank of Japan Governor Haruhiko Kuroda shocked markets earlier this week
by doubling a cap on 10-year yields, in a move that helps pave the way for
possible monetary policy normalization under a new governor.
The change, which blindsided all 47 economists surveyed by Bloomberg
ahead of the decision, has the potential upend global markets as the cap has
helped keep borrowing costs low worldwide. Later in the week, Japan’s key
inflation gauge accelerated to the fastest pace since 1981, continuing to fuel
speculation the BOJ will surprise markets again.

Haruhiko Kuroda on Dec. 20. Photographer: Yuya Yamamoto/Jiji Press/Bloomberg

In the US, the Federal Reserve’s preferred inflation gauge continued to
retreat, but wages are still rising much too fast for policymakers’ liking. Real
consumer spending flat-lined, but officials will want to see more than a
month of data to indicate demand is substantially cooling.
Here are some of the charts that appeared on Bloomberg this week on the
latest developments in the global economy:
Asia

Source: Bloomberg Economics

Kuroda’s decision to widen the trading band

on 10-year bond yields

triggered a jump in the yen and roiled global markets. The move shook
markets — boosting the yen and bond yields, while sending stocks lower. The
implications go far beyond Japan. With the BOJ — the last advanced economy
holdout in a global monetary tightening shift — now letting the benchmark
yield trade higher than before, the shock will echo across global financial
markets.
China’s broad budget deficit hit a record so far this year, showing how
damaging the now abandoned Covid Zero policy and the ongoing housing
slump have been to the economy and to the government’s finances. The
augmented fiscal deficit was 7.75 trillion yuan ($1.1 trillion) in January to
November, according to Bloomberg calculations based on data from the
Ministry of Finance.

Economic activity continued to fall in December for China’s small firms, with
the business outlook weakening further as Covid cases surge amid
reopening, according to Standard Chartered Plc. A gauge of business
conditions at small and medium enterprises was in contractionary territory
for a third straight month in December.
US & Canada

US inflation continued to ease into the end of 2022 and expectations of
future increases dropped, reinforcing hopes that the worst bout of price

pressures in a generation has finally passed. However, wages are still
climbing much too fast as the job market remains tight.

US sales of previously owned homes fell for a 10th-straight month in
November, extending a record decline as high mortgage rates continue to
stifle affordability. Contract signings to buy single-family houses slumped to
a 12-year low, while sales of condominiums also dropped.

Canada’s inflation rate decelerated in November but key gauges of
underlying price pressures trended higher, potentially dashing hopes for a
pause in interest-rate increases. Consumer price data show price pressures
remain stubbornly high, even as the economy gears down and higher
borrowing costs curb domestic demand.
Europe
UK household incomes fell for a fourth straight quarter, leaving Britons on
course for the worst period for living standards in memory as officials
estimated the economy was weaker than previously thought. Adjusted for
inflation, disposable income per person declined 0.5% in the third quarter,
while gross domestic product fell 0.3%.
UK government borrowing surged in November as the public finances came
under mounting pressure from rising debt-interest payments and the huge
cost of subsidizing energy bills for consumers and businesses. The budget
deficit stood at £22 billion ($26.8 billion) –- the highest monthly total in
records stretching back to 1993 and almost triple the £8.1 billion reading a
year ago.
Emerging Markets
Vietnam is on track this year to bump Britain from its long-time place among
the US’s top seven goods trading partners, which would be the first time the
UK hasn’t been in that group in records going back at least to 2004. The UK’s
share of the US merchandise trade slid to 2.6% through the first 10 months of
this year while Vietnam’s rose to 2.7%, according to US Census Bureau data.
After some of the world’s most aggressive interest-rate hikes, Brazil’s
inflation has plunged by half in the past six months. That sounds like
mission accomplished — except the central bank doesn’t see it that way.
While the bank’s benchmark now offers an inflation-adjusted return of
almost 8% — a global high among major economies – traders reckon its next
move is more likely to be another bout of monetary tightening because of
fiscal policy.
World

Policymakers in Egypt, Morocco and Indonesia raised interest rates this
week while those in Hungary
, Paraguay
and Czech Republic
stayed on hold.
— With assistance from Zoe Schneeweiss, Ailing Tan, Liza Tetley, Randy
Thanthong-Knight, Lin Zhu, Yuki Masujima, Philip Aldrick, Andrew Atkinson,
Maria Eloisa Capurro, John Liu, Brendan Murray, and Reade Pickert

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

