Markets

European Stocks Gain as Traders Look Ahead to US
Inflation Data

By Allegra Catelli
November 13, 2023 at 3:12 AM EST
Updated on November 13, 2023 at 11:56 AM EST
Save

Translate

2:47

This article is for subscribers only.

European stocks rose in a broad rally ahead of US inflation data on Tuesday,
which will provide clues on the outlook for Federal Reserve interest rates.
The Stoxx 600 Index was up 0.8% higher at the close in London, with travel
& leisure, energy and banks sectors leading the advance. Evolution AB led
the surge in travel and leisure shares after the company
’s chief executive
officer bought shares. Oil rose after three weeks of decline and gave a boost
to energy stocks.
All eyes will be on US inflation numbers this week as the economy shows
continued resilience, which has strengthened the odds that the central bank
will be able to steer the US into a rare soft landing. Sentiment remains at
risk, however, should the reading on price pressures or central bankers’
commentary point to a higher-for-longer stance.
“It’s hard to squeeze much more from equities, given how much they are
already pricing a disinflationary report,” said Florian Ielpo, head of macro
research at Lombard Odier Asset Management.

“Any bad news from the inflation report and equities will rapidly flux back to
where they were a couple weeks ago,” Ielpo said. “This rally can have legs,
but for that, we need confirmation that we still live in a softlanding/disinflation world.”
Top banks Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs Group Inc. diverge on Fed
rate cut forecasts, reflecting different narratives in the market. While
Morgan Stanley economists forecast the Federal Reserve to make deep
interest-rate cuts over the next two years as inflation cools, at Goldman
Sachs, analysts expect fewer reductions and a later start.

Signed
Sign Up
Up
By continuing, I agree to the Privacy Policy and Terms of Service.

In other individual stock moves, Novo Nordisk A/S rallied after data on
weight-loss drug Wegovy showed it cut heart attacks in obesity patients with
a history of cardiovascular disease, before the stock pared its gains. Siemens
Energy AG
jumped as investors anticipated an agreement on guarantees,
due to be unveiled on Wednesday. Meanwhile, Richemont

declined for a

second day after its disappointing results were followed by a few price-target
cuts.
On earnings, UBS Global Wealth Management strategists said

European

companies may not have shown widespread weakness, but downgrades to
their forecasts are the worrying factor. Goldman Sachs strategists, on the
other hand, said investors are overly concerned about the weakening
outlook for US corporate earnings, which so far merely track a historical
pattern.
For more on equity markets:
High Cost

of Debt Is Emerging as Top Risk for 2024: Taking Stock

M&A Watch

Europe: TotalEnergies, Vodafone, Cellnex, SocGen

US Stock

Futures Fall

You want more news on this market? Click here for a curated First Word
channel of actionable news from Bloomberg and select sources. It can be
customized to your preferences by clicking into Actions on the toolbar or
hitting the HELP key for assistance. To subscribe to a daily list of European
analyst rating changes, click here.
— With assistance from Jan-Patrick Barnert
This story was produced with the assistance of Bloomberg Automation.

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters

Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

