Markets

Soaring Dollar Is ‘Only Safe Haven Left’ After Hot US
Inflation
The dollar is on track for its biggest gain since May 5
Pound leads G-10 losses as EM FX gauge sinks to May lows

US Unmute
Inflation Hits 40-Year High of 8.6%

0:00
0:00
US Inflation Hits 40-Year High of 8.6%

By Maria Elena Vizcaino and Emily Graffeo
June 10, 2022 at 11:44 AM EDT
Save

Translate

2:10

This article is for subscribers only.

Investors are rushing to buy dollars after US inflation accelerated to a fresh
40-year high last month, adding pressure on the Federal Reserve for more
aggressive interest-rate increases.
A key gauge of the dollar jumped 0.8% on Friday, heading for its biggest gain
in five weeks after US consumer prices quickened 8.6% from a year earlier,

topping estimates. The greenback’s strength sent nearly all of its Group-of-10
and emerging-market peers tumbling. MSCI Inc’s developing currency index
is on track for its worst day since early May, led by losses in Brazil’s real and
South African rand.
“Markets are shifting expectations toward a higher terminal rate for the Fed.
That’s supportive for the US dollar and bad for risk assets,” said Bipan Rai,
head of foreign-exchange strategy at Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce.
“The need to take settings into restrictive territory has increased.”
Read more: US inflation accelerates to 40-Year High, putting pressuring Fed
and Biden

The British pound led losses among Group-of-10 currencies, weakening by as
much as 1.4% to the lowest in three weeks, as traders bet the local monetary
authority will lag global peers in the race to increase rates. The South
African rand, a bellwether for risk sentiment within the developing world,
lost more than 2.3% on Friday, the most in over a month.
The rush for dollars comes as swap contracts referencing Fed policy meeting
dates repriced to levels suggesting that the US central bank -- which was
already expected to raise rates by half-a-point in June and July -- will do so

again in September, with some risk of a three-quarter point increase in
months to come.
That contrasts with a more dovish stance held by Bank of Japan, which has
sapped some safe-haven appeal from its currency. The Japanese yen edged
higher against the dollar on Friday, but still traded near a 20-year low. The
Swiss franc is also failing to lure traders, falling as much as 1% Friday for a
sixth straight decline versus the greenback.
“With US rates much higher and stocks way lower, the dollar is a safe-haven
trade,” said Brent Donnelly, president of Spectra FX Solutions. “The only
safe haven left is the US dollar.”

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

