Markets

Traders in $7 Trillion Market Turn to Obscure Option
to CPI Data

By Greg Ritchie
October 28, 2025 at 1:51 PM EDT
Save

Translate

4:01

Takeaways by Bloomberg AI
Traders are grappling with the scenario of having to price securities tied to US
inflation without any consumer price data due to the US government
shutdown.
The shutdown is leading investors to explore untested fallback mechanisms
embedded into inflation-linked bond and derivative legal documentation as an
alternative to the missing data.
The discrepancy in the fallbacks for different types of inflation-linked
securities is opening up a potentially fascinating divergence and creating
relative value opportunities for investors.

Traders in a $7 trillion market are grappling with the unprecedented
scenario of having to price securities tied to US inflation without any
consumer price data.
With the US government shut since the beginning of the month the data void
is likely to be prolonged, especially after the White House said the US
probably won’t release inflation data for October. That’s leading investors to
explore untested fallback mechanisms embedded into inflation-linked bond
and derivative legal documentation decades ago as an alternative.
These contingency plans reflected a tail risk that until recently was hard to
imagine given the systemic importance of US economic data. The nation’s
consumer price rises are embedded into a range of financial contracts, while
the release each month jolts global markets and influences Federal Reserve
monetary policy.

Complicating matters, not all inflation-linked securities use the same
fallbacks. The methodology for the $2 trillion Treasury inflation-protected
securities (TIPS) differs from those used in the $5 trillion market for inflation
swaps, which are used by investors and companies to hedge against price
increases.
That’s already leading to the outperformance of a TIPS maturing in January
on the prospect of a greater payout. The longer this shutdown persists, the
greater the distortion of a market used by investors to protect against price
increases and policymakers to gauge inflation expectations.
“The discrepancy in the fallbacks opens up a potentially fascinating
divergence,” said Jon Hill, head of US inflation strategy at Barclays. “This is
certainly a space for the inflation market to watch as the shutdown drags on
and an example of relative value opportunities that may emerge.”
The fallback methodology for TIPS is defined by the US Treasury. If there’s
no October data, then the Treasury will announce a synthetic number
“based on the last available twelve-month change in the CPI,” which is
between Sept. 2024 and Sept. 2025.
For zero-coupon inflation swaps, standard contracts use International Swaps
and Derivatives Association documentation. If the derivative is not linked to
a specific bond, ISDA’s fallback calculation would take the October 2024
figure and grow it by the September 2025 year-on-year change.
The current government shutdown, now the second-longest in US history, is
threatening to exacerbate these distortions as investors continue to fly blind.
While the Bureau of Labor Statistics was directed to recall some staff to
prepare the September CPI report in a rare exception, all active data
collection activities have been paused, derailing plans for the October
figures and possibly beyond.
Read More: October US Inflation Report at Risk Even If Last Month Salvaged
The potential use of fallbacks has particular implications for TIPS coupon
and principal payments scheduled in January. Under Treasury rules, the

amount that investors receive on Jan. 15 of any year is interpolated from
October and November CPI values.
However, depending on the methodologies used, the results would be
different. For October, the TIPS fallback would produce an index reading of
325.604, greater than the swaps fallback of 325.174, according to Bloomberg
calculations. If the November reading is also unavailable, the divergence
widens to 326.411 for TIPS and 324.998 for swaps.
The TIPS note maturing in January would have an annualized breakeven rate
of 3.15% compared to 1.76% for the comparable derivative, according to
Barclays calculations based on there being no October or November CPI
data.
“This is a massive wedge between the TIPS breakeven and the matchedmaturity CPI swap,” said Barclays’ Hill.
The TIPS maturing in January is already richening on a relative basis to
reflect the potential use of the October fallback, according to JPMorgan
Chase and Co. strategists led by Jay Barry. That could extend further if the
November CPI data is also unlikely to be released.
“In the scenario that the shutdown extends beyond another few weeks,
which appears increasingly likely, these securities could richen further,” the
JPMorgan strategists said.
— With assistance from Elizabeth Stanton

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters

Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

