Markets

Oil Sinks to Three-Month Low in End-of-Day
Stampede to Exits
OPEC sees moderate surplus amid seasonal lull next quarter
WTI fell as much as 5.7% to trade below $71 before settle

By Immanual John Milton and Natalia Kniazhevich
March 13, 2023 at 8:03 PM EDT
Updated on March 14, 2023 at 4:03 PM EDT
Save

Translate

2:20

This article is for subscribers only.

Oil nosedived late in the session as ample crude supply balances and
growing unease over the US economy’s trajectory sent bulls fleeing.
Both Brent and West Texas Intermediate crude fell to three-month lows. The
Organization of Petroleum Export Countries said it sees a modest surplus
next quarter during a seasonal lull in demand. After prices settled, crude
continued its descent, testing lows not seen seen since Dec. 2021.
The late-day plummet was “pretty astounding,” said Rebecca Babin, a senior
energy trader at CIBC Private Wealth. Meanwhile, activity in the options
market
suggests traders are growing more bearish.
“Energy traders can’t find a reason to buy this dip until we get past the next
round of inventory data,” said Ed Moya, a senior market analyst at Oanda.
“Rising stockpiles are expected and that could keep oil vulnerable over the
next 24 hours,”

Crude has had a bumpy year so far as traders juggle concerns over a global
economic slowdown and careful optimism regarding China’s demand
rebound. Inflation accelerated last month, raising the question as to whether
the Federal Reserve would feel pressure to raise rates at its meeting next
week despite ongoing financial turmoil in the banking system.
Traders will be watching price action to see if the flat price is supported at
recent lows. “If buyers don’t show up soon and support oil at $70, we can
see an air pocket lower to $62,” said Jc O’Hara, the chief technical strategist
at Roth Mkm.
US inventory data is scheduled to be published Wednesday morning. The
International Energy Agency also releases its snapshot on the outlook for
supply and demand on Wednesday.
Prices:
WTI for April delivery fell $3.47 to settle at $71.33 a barrel in New York.
Brent for May settlement dropped $3.32 to settle at $77.45 a barrel.

Related coverage and commentary:

Russian Oil Flows Rebound as India Buys More Pacific Cargoes
Biden Backs $8 Billion Oil Project, Imperiling Green Agenda
Russia’s Crude Oil Output Stable at 9.8m B/d in February: OPEC
French Strikes and US Oil Flows Take Toll on European Market (1)
Germany Pushing for Nar-Term Deal on Combustion-Engine Talks

Elements, Bloomberg’s daily energy and commodities newsletter, is now
available. Sign up here.

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

