Economics

US Inflation Unexpectedly Slows Down Ahead of
Tariffs Impact

US Unmute
Economy: Core CPI Rises Less Than Expected in March

0:00
0:00
US inflation softened in March, while weekly jobless claims remained at a level that underscores a solid job
market. Michael McKee reports on Bloomberg Television. Source: Bloomberg

By Augusta Saraiva
April 10, 2025 at 8:32 AM EDT
Updated on April 10, 2025 at 10:16 AM EDT
Save

Translate

5:24

This article is for subscribers only.

Takeaways by Bloomberg AI
The consumer price index (CPI) declined 0.1% from February, the first
decrease in nearly five years, indicating some relief for consumers prior to
widespread tariffs that risk contributing to price pressures.
The inflation slowdown reflected a decline in energy costs, used vehicles,
hotel stays, and airfares, with the cost of motor vehicle insurance also
retreating.

Despite the current slowdown, some experts warn that higher inflation may be
coming due to tariffs, with the impact expected to be felt in the May CPI
report.

US inflation cooled broadly in March, indicating some relief for consumers
prior to widespread tariffs that risk contributing to price pressures.
The consumer price index, excluding often volatile food and energy costs,
increased 0.1% from February, the least in nine months, according to Bureau
of Labor Statistics data out Thursday. The overall CPI declined 0.1% from a
month earlier, the first decrease in nearly five years.
The inflation slowdown reflected a decline in energy costs, used vehicles,
hotel stays and airfares. The cost of motor vehicle insurance — a main source
of inflation in recent years — also retreated.
Here's Why America's Debt is a Trade War Victim

9:03

Listen to the Here’s Why podcast on Apple, Spotify or anywhere you listen.
The 10-year Treasury yield were little changed after the figures, while the
S&P 500 opened lower and the dollar remained weaker.
The report showed little impact so far from tariffs already in place — in
categories like toys and appliances that are more exposed to China —
although that may change in coming months as President Donald Trump’s
higher levies filter through the economy.
And price declines for services like hotel stays and airfares may be a warning
sign that some consumers are cutting back on discretionary spending.
Trump seized on the good news, noting in a Truth Social post: ‘Just out:
“INFLATION IS DOWN!!!”’

“It is the calm before the inflation storm. We’re going to get some higher
inflation out of the tariffs,” said David Kelly, chief global strategist at JP
Morgan Asset Management, on Bloomberg Television. “What we’re seeing is
a lot of softness in the travel industry, which I think is going to get worse
over the course of this year.”
Metric

Actual

Estimate

CPI MoM

-0.1%

+0.1%

Core CPI MoM

+0.1%

+0.3%

CPI YoY

+2.4%

+2.5%

Core CPI YoY

+2.8%

+3.0%

While Trump announced 90-day pause on higher reciprocal tariffs on
Wednesday — less than 24 hours after they came into effect — imports from
most countries are now subject to 10% duties. The US began collecting tariffs
last month on imported steel and aluminum, and levies on China now stand
at 125% after retaliation from Beijing earlier this week.
Read More: Trump Pauses Higher Duties on Most Nations, Hikes China Rate
Some of the higher import costs will ultimately be passed on to the
consumers, and companies from Target Co. to Volkswagen AG have warned
higher prices are in store for Americans.
The uncertainty is keeping Federal Reserve officials in wait-and-see mode as
they look for more clarity on the impact the levies will have on inflation —
and the economy more broadly.
Read More: Logan Says Fed Must Ensure Tariffs Don’t Spark Lasting Inflation
Even with some tariffs already in place in March, some of the categories
more exposed to China posted declines, including toys, appliances and
smartphones. The CPI report showed core goods prices dropped 0.1% last
month, the first decrease since August.

“The experience of tariffs on washing machines in 2018 suggests that it takes
three months for consumer prices to respond to new tariffs, after which pass
through is rapid,” Samuel Tombs, chief US economist at Pantheon
Macroeconomics, said in a note. He added that the impact should be felt
with the May CPI report.
What Bloomberg Economics Says...
“March’s surprisingly soft CPI report shows limited to no pass-through so
far from the 20-ppt increase in tariffs on Chinese goods in February and
March. What it does show is consumers pulling back discretionary
spending in both goods and services categories. The April CPI report due
May 13 — covering a period when China tariffs were further raised to more
than 100% — will provide more evidence on the extent of price passthrough.”
— Anna Wong and Stuart Paul
To read the full note, click here
While all eyes have been on the impact tariffs will have on goods prices, one
of the key drivers of inflation in recent years has been housing costs — which
are the largest category within services. Shelter prices rose at a moderate
pace, reflecting the steepest drop in hotel stays in more than three years.
There were still signs of lingering price pressures facing households.
Owners’ equivalent rent accelerated to a 0.4% monthly pace and grocery
costs increased 0.5%, matching the biggest gain since October 2022. Meat
prices accelerated, while the cost of eggs posted a smaller advance than a
month earlier.
Read More: Eggs Hit Record as Retailers Keep Prices High on Supply Fears
Within services, motor vehicle and household insurance, as well as car
rental costs declined last month.
Excluding housing and energy, services prices declined by the most in nearly
five years, according to Bloomberg calculations. While central bankers have

stressed the importance of looking at such a metric when assessing the
overall inflation trajectory, they compute it based on a separate index.
That measure — known as the personal consumption expenditures price
index — doesn’t put as much weight on shelter as the CPI, which helps
explain why it’s trending closer to the Fed’s 2% target. A government report
on producer prices due Friday will offer insights on additional categories
that feed directly into the March PCE, which is due later this month.
One of the components from CPI that plays a big role in the core PCE price
basket is food away from home, which increased 0.4% for a second month.
Big Take
The Bacon Egg and Cheese Theory of Economics

20:11

Follow The Big Take daily podcast wherever you listen.
Another report published Thursday showed initial applications for
unemployment benefits rose to 223,000 last week, remaining close to
historical lows.
Policymakers also pay close attention to wage growth, as it can help inform
expectations for consumer spending — the main engine of the economy. A
separate report Thursday that combines the inflation figures with recent
wage data showed real average hourly earnings climbed 1.4% from the year
before, the most since November.
— With assistance from Chris Middleton and Nazmul Ahasan
(Adds Trump comment in sixth paragraph, video)

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

