Economics | Inflation & Prices

US Core CPI Eases to Four-Year Low in Shutdown-Hit
Report

Unmute

Ad

0:15

US Core CPI Eases in November to Slowest Pace Since 2021

By Mark Niquette
December 18, 2025 at 8:33 AM EST
Updated on December 18, 2025 at 4:22 PM EST
Save

Translate

5:28

Underlying US inflation rose in November at the slowest annual pace since
early 2021, an unexpected improvement in a report muddled by the
government shutdown.
The core consumer price index, which excludes the often-volatile food and
energy categories, increased 2.6% in November from a year ago, according
to Bureau of Labor Statistics data out Thursday. The overall CPI climbed
2.7% in November from a year ago.

The longest-ever government shutdown prevented the BLS from collecting
much of the October price data. That not only limited the agency’s ability to
determine month-over-month changes for the broader measures of inflation,
but some economists noted it likely impacted the annual November figures
as well.
Despite numerous caveats, the report offers some hope that inflationary
pressures are easing after remaining stuck in a narrow range since early this
year. The BLS said the core CPI rose just 0.2% over the two months ended in
November, restrained by declines in costs of hotel stays, recreation and
apparel. Prices of household furnishings and personal care products rose.
However, several economists noted that the two-month change in key
shelter categories, which are some of the biggest components of the CPI,
was basically flat — calling the calculations into question.
“It’s possible that this does reflect a genuine drop off in inflationary
pressures, but such a sudden stop, particularly in the more-persistent
services components like rent of shelter is very unusual, at least outside of a
recession,” Paul Ashworth, chief North America economist at Capital
Economics, said in a note.
“The upshot is that is looks like we all have to wait until the December data
is published next month to verify whether this is a statistical blip or a
genuine disinflation,” he said.

Signed
Sign Up
Up
By continuing, I agree to the Privacy Policy and Terms of Service.

Stacey Standish, a spokesperson for BLS, said the agency used a process
called carry-forward imputation for key housing price metrics. This method
“imputes the price by using data from the last collected period, effectively
proceeding as if the price had not changed,” she said. “Rents for October

2025 were carried forward from April 2025, yielding unchanged index
values for rent and owners’ equivalent rent for October.”
What Bloomberg Economics Says...
“While we take this report with a grain of salt, we do think there’s some
real signal of slowing inflation, and the chances of a rate cut in January
have increased. We expect the Fed to cut by 100 bps in 2026.”
— Anna Wong, Chris G. Collins and Troy Durie
To read the full note, click here
It’s not clear whether the CPI report will sway Federal Reserve
policymakers, who remain divided on the course of interest rates next year.
Last week, the Fed cut rates for a third straight meeting to guard against a
more concerning deterioration in the labor market.
The S&P 500 opened higher, while Treasury yields remained lower and the
dollar fell after the report. Investors expect the Fed to cut rates at least twice
next year.
Read More: Fed Cuts Rates With Three Dissents, Projects One Cut in 2026
Speaking after the decision last week, Chair Jerome Powell said the CPI data
“may be distorted” because of the record-long government shutdown that
ended on Nov. 12.
BLS said data collection began two days after that, whereas it would
typically sample prices throughout the month. However, the agency
authorized additional collection hours to try to gather more data. Some
economists noted the delay may have skewed the figures, given discounts
around Black Friday.
“The slowdown was broad-based across nearly all categories, adding to our
suspicions that the shutdown’s disruptions caused issues in the data,” Wells
Fargo & Co. economists said in a note. “Data collection didn’t begin until the

second half of November, which may have skewed the sample more than we
anticipated.”
Goods prices, excluding food and energy commodities, rose 1.4% on an
annual basis. That compares with 1.5% increases in August and September.
Using data collected from third-party sources, the BLS was able to report
monthly prices changes for some select categories, including new and used
vehicles and gasoline.
New-car prices rose 0.2% after edging up 0.1% a month earlier, while usedcar price growth decelerated. Powell said that he expects inflation from
goods to peak in the first quarter, assuming no new major tariff
announcements.
Shelter Costs
Services prices excluding energy climbed 3% on an annual basis. Airfares
and hotel stays declined from a year ago. Another services gauge closely
tracked by the Fed, which strips out housing and energy costs, rose 2.7%
from November 2024 — matching the smallest annual advance since 2021.
One of the key drivers of inflation in recent years has been housing costs —
the largest category within services. Shelter prices increased 3% from a year
ago, the smallest advance in more than four years.
CPI largely relies on in-person visits to retail stores and service
establishments across the country to gather prices for thousands of items.
That accounts for about 60% of the sample, while other prices are collected
over the phone, online and through third-party sources. The BLS said the
number of indexes that are composed of non-survey data is “very limited.”
Consumer spending is the main engine of the economy, and a separate
report Thursday that combines the inflation figures with recent wage data
showed that real average hourly earnings climbed 0.8% from the year
before.

Other figures showed applications for US unemployment benefits fell after a
spike in the previous week, underscoring the choppy nature of the data at
this time of year.
— With assistance from Reade Pickert and Julia Fanzeres
(Adds response from BLS)

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

