Markets | Markets

European Stocks Decline as Investors Mull Inflation,
Growth Risk

By Leigh-Ann Gerrans and Sagarika Jaisinghani
May 10, 2023 at 3:09 AM EDT
Updated on May 10, 2023 at 11:51 AM EDT
Save

Translate

3:31

This article is for subscribers only.

European stocks declined after briefly bouncing on cooling US inflation,
with investors also assessing a slew of corporate earnings as well as the
possibility of a US recession.
The Stoxx 600 Index was down 0.4% by the close. The technology, energy
and real estate subindexes outperformed, while personal-care stocks trailed.
Figures earlier showed US inflation moderated in April, giving the Federal
Reserve room to pause interest-rate increases soon. However, market
participants warned stocks could remain volatile amid a glum economic
outlook. Bloomberg News reported that an investment firm controlled by a
top Abu Dhabi royal has built a short position worth billions of dollars in US
stocks in a bet that growing fears over a recession will pressure markets.
While there’s “definitely some relief” that inflation figures were not hotter
than expected, “big picture, the outcome isn’t rosy,” said John Leiper, chief
investment officer at Titan Asset Management. “The short bullish reaction
was predicated on short-term relief. Now that’s out the way, the
fundamentals are still not great.”

Signed
Sign Up
Up
By continuing, I agree to the Privacy Policy and Terms of Service.

The benchmark index has struggled to extend a rally from last month amid
concerns about persistent inflation and the possibility of a US recession.
Traders are also on guard for risks from the standoff in US debt talks.
Meanwhile, European Central Bank officials are starting to accept that
interest-rate increases might need to continue in September to bring
inflation fully under control, Bloomberg News reported.

Max Kettner, chief multi-asset strategist at HSBC, said markets are “torn
between competing forces” of upbeat earnings and economic data on one
hand and concerns around US regional banking turmoil on the other.
“As a result, equity markets are lacking direction currently, as also sentiment
and positioning among investors is still quite cautious,” he said.
Barclays Plc strategists also said they now see “little fundamental upside” in
stocks following the rally that was led by defensive sectors.

According to Fabiana Fedeli, chief investment officer for equities, multi-asset
and sustainability at M&G Plc, markets are pricing in a mild recession, “but
the truth is it’s very difficult to understand what kind of recession we’re
going to have and what the timing is going to be.”
“If we were to get a deep recession, then that would not be a good
environment for equities,” Fedeli said on Bloomberg TV.
Among individual stocks, Vestas Wind Systems A/S rose as it showed a
surprise profit
for the first quarter, an indication of a turnaround for the
wind turbine maker after a few tough years. ABN Amro Bank NV dropped
even as the Dutch bank reported higher-than-expected first-quarter profit.

Bloomberg TV
@BloombergTV · Follow

Credit Agricole
ABN Amro
Continental
@lizzzburden talks us through the stocks to watch in
Europe this morning bloom.bg/3nKDGPZ
Watch on X

3:34 AM · May 10, 2023
19

Reply

Copy link
Read 1 reply

SECTORS IN FOCUS:
European video-game stocks after Electronic Arts reported record
revenue for its fiscal fourth quarter, beating analysts’ estimates thanks to
higher player engagement with franchises like its popular soccer title.
For more on equity markets:
Real Estate

Refinancing Troubles Are Just Starting: Taking Stock

M&A Watch

Europe: Software AG, Prosus, Glencore, Adnoc, Sobi

JPM Says

Brexit ‘Cannibalized’ London Listing Pool: ECM Watch

US Stock

Futures Unchanged; Twilio, Airbnb, Vroom Fall

You want more news on this market? Click here for a curated First Word
channel of actionable news from Bloomberg and select sources. It can be
customized to your preferences by clicking into Actions on the toolbar or
hitting the HELP key for assistance. To subscribe to a daily list of European
analyst rating changes, click here.
— With assistance from Michael Msika
This story was produced with the assistance of Bloomberg Automation.

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

