Markets

Dollar Suffers Biggest Plunge Since 2009 as CPI
Smacks Fed Bets
Yen gains almost 4%, leading gains among developed peers
Yen, rand can outperform as dollar weakens, says HSBC

US Unmute
Core Inflation Cools More Than Forecast

0:00
0:00
US Core Inflation Cools More Than Forecast

By Bloomberg News
November 10, 2022 at 9:58 AM EST
Updated on November 10, 2022 at 5:14 PM EST
Save

Translate

2:17

This article is for subscribers only.

The dollar had its worst day since 2009 after Thursday’s US inflation report
surprised traders with slower growth in consumer prices, driving
speculation that the Federal Reserve will ease the pace of its interest-rate
increases.

The Bloomberg Dollar Spot Index fell 2% after a key inflation gauge cooled in
October by more than expected, the biggest drop since 2009.
The consumer price report offered hope that the fastest price gains in
decades are ebbing and giving Federal Reserve officials room to slow down
amid an aggressive tightening campaign. Traders dialed back expectations to
how high they expect rates to go before the Fed stops hiking, the so-called
terminal rate of the cycle.
A slower pace of rate hikes could curb the dollar’s rally this year which has
weakened its Group-of-10 currency peers. One-month risk reversals on the
greenback, a gauge of option positioning and sentiment, fell to their lowest
level since June, a sign that dollar demand may be waning.
“The softer core CPI reading is leading to markets to reprice the terminal
rate lower,” said Bipan Rai, head of foreign-exchange strategy at Canadian
Imperial Bank of Commerce. “That’s leading to further pain right now in the
dollar.”

The market expectation is now showing that a 50-basis-point hike in
December is far more likely than a 75-basis-point move, lowering the rates
differential with the European Central Bank and the Bank of England.

The yen gained close to 4%, leading gains among Group-of-10 currencies. In
this environment for the dollar, the yen and South African rand have room
to outperform, said Gregory Marks, a foreign-exchange trader at HSBC.
“The market has found itself on the wrong side in a big way with averages on
positions likely being challenged.” he said.
European currencies surged against the dollar, with the pound climbing as
much as 3.3% to the highest since mid-September. The euro rose as much as
2.1% to the highest in nearly two months, while the Swiss franc jumped over
2% versus the greenback. The move lower in the greenback may not,
however, be one-way traffic going forward.
“The Fed is likely to remind the market that underlying inflation is still threetimes higher than target and remains persistent, so some of the selloff in the
dollar and the rise in risk appetite could be misplaced,” Jane Foley, a
strategist at Rabobank in London, said.
(Updates prices. A previous version of this story was corrected to fix reference to
size of dollar’s daily decline.)

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

