Economics

Yellen Sees ‘Very Helpful Signs’ on US Inflation Front
Supply-chain problems have ‘significantly’ eased: Yellen
Expects high rents inflation to fall back in mid-2023

Several measures of inflation have shown encouraging signs in recent weeks. Photographer: David Paul
Morris/Bloomberg

By Christopher Condon
January 23, 2023 at 6:00 AM EST
Save

Translate

1:31

This article is for subscribers only.

US Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen said she’s encouraged by progress on
inflation, with energy prices and supply-chain issues easing across the globe
even as the US labor market remains strong.

“We’re seeing those supply-chain problems significantly mitigate,
inventories are being built, shipping costs have come down,” Yellen told
reporters after visiting a community health center in Lusaka, Zambia’s
capital. “And so that part of inflation is no longer really contributing very
significantly.”
Several measures of inflation have shown encouraging signs in recent weeks,
including declines in the consumer price index, which fell to 6.5% in the
year through December, off its high of 9% in June. Producer prices have also
declined faster than expected.
In response, Treasuries have surged, with investors betting the Federal
Reserve will stop raising rates and begin reducing borrowing costs sooner
than policymakers are currently projecting.
Yellen also said that goods prices moved down late in 2022 and that she
expected housing inflation — a particularly strong contributor to price
pressures in the second half of the year — to cool by mid-2023.
“Over the next six months, that should largely cease boosting US inflation,”
she said. “I do think in the US we’re continuing to see a strong labor market
and progress on inflation. And so those are very helpful signs.”
Yellen is on a three-stop Africa trip aimed at boosting US ties with the
continent. She’s set to hold discussions later Monday with Zambian
President Hakainde Hichilema, with the country’s debt woes being the
central focus.

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?

Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

