Markets

Treasuries Slide as Nervous Traders Look Ahead to
US Inflation
US two-year yield climbs to 4.27% after earlier drop to 3.82%
US to report CPI Tuesday, which will influence Fed hike bets

FedUnmute
Bets Batter US Bond Yields

0:00
0:00
Fed Bets Batter US Bond Yields

By Marcus Wong, Matthew Burgess, and James Hirai
March 14, 2023 at 2:28 AM EDT
Updated on March 14, 2023 at 7:52 AM EDT
Save

Translate

2:59

This article is for subscribers only.

Treasuries swung to a loss Tuesday, a sign of traders’ heightened sensitivity
to news on the health of the banking system ahead of key inflation data that
may determine the Federal Reserve’s next move.

Two-year yields took a huge round trip, initially climbing to 4.19%, then
plunging to 3.82% before surging again to 4.27%. That comes as markets
resume bets on a potential Fed interest-rate hike next week, having briefly
erased all tightening wagers on Monday.
The sharp moves follow the biggest drop in the two-year yield since 1982 on
Monday, after the failure of Silicon Valley Bank and other US lenders.
Nervousness was reignited Tuesday by Credit Suisse Group AG identifying
“material weaknesses” in its reporting procedures, leaving the risk of
contagion in investors’ minds.
“Markets are very sensitive to any news and indication of the economy and
the health of the financial sector, especially as we head into the US CPI,” said
Jessica Ren, a strategist at Westpac Banking Corp. in Sydney. “Any signs of
distress especially within the banking sector will likely see a reaction on the
back of it.”

Credit Suisse Finds ‘Material Weakness’ in Financial Reporting
Treasuries have been whipsawed in the past week by the constantly
changing outlook for borrowing costs. US overnight indexed swaps are now
pricing 19 basis points of hikes for next week, down from 44 basis points

seen last week. That puts the chances of a 25 basis-point move at around
75%.
Two-year yields traded up 26 basis points at 4.24% by 7:45 a.m. in New York,
while 10-year rates were only up five basis points. Just last week, two-year
Treasury yields surged above 5% after Fed Chair Jerome Powell sparked
wagers the central bank will accelerate the pace of its hikes at the March 22
meeting.
Moves by US authorities to support the banking sector have spurred calls for
the central bank to soften its policy stance, but there’s a lack of consensus of
how the crisis will impact official thinking.
Goldman Sachs Group Inc. economists and Pacific Investment Management
Co. asset managers have said the Fed may take a breather on the policy rate
following the collapse of SVB, while Nomura Securities economists think the
Fed may even cut its benchmark rate by a quarter percentage-point next
week. However, BlackRock Investment Institute said it expects the US central
bank to press ahead with rate hikes to combat inflation.
“One has to be careful to make another assumption that shockwaves
emanating from several bank failures can be ringfenced effectively,” said
Winson Phoon, head of fixed-income research at Maybank Securities Pte Ltd
in Singapore. “Previously it was fundamentals that drove market sentiment
but now, an avalanche of sentiment can change the fundamentals.”
Read more about swings in Treasuries here:
Now That the Fed Broke Something, Traders Overhaul Bets on Rates
What to Watch in Money Markets for Signs of Systemic Bank Stress
Treasuries Bull Who Hit Jackpot Sees 10-Year Yield Falling to 2%
Treasury Two-Year Yield Rebounds After Biggest Slide in Decades
The Great Hiking Cycle Is Seen as Done as Yields Drop Below Cash

— With assistance from Michael G Wilson, Greg Ritchie, and Cormac Mullen

(Updates prices.)

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

