Markets

Yen Traders Brace for Risk of Deeper Drop on US
Inflation Data
Interest-rate differential has fueled down trend all year
Japan’s finance minister warns government is ready to act

By Yumi Teso and Saburo Funabiki
November 13, 2023 at 11:41 PM EST
Updated on November 14, 2023 at 2:01 AM EST
Save

Translate

2:24

This article is for subscribers only.

Yen traders are bracing for US inflation data later Tuesday as a potential
trigger to push the currency to a 33-year low and draw Japanese authorities
into the market.
It is already trading at levels that saw intervention last year and on Monday
came within a whisker of breaching the key 151.95 threshold versus the
dollar. Japanese Finance Minister Shunichi Suzuki has warned
repeatedly
this week that the government will respond to excessive moves.
The wide gap between Japan’s ultra-low interest rates and those in the US
has pushed the yen down all year, but in recent months the threat of action
from Tokyo has tempered more aggressive bets against the currency. Strong
US consumer price figures, however, would expand the yield differential
even further, embolden bears to sell the currency and in turn increase the
likelihood of yen purchases from Japan.
“Market participants are paying close attention to CPI, with any faster-thanexpected inflation readings set to boost the risk of the dollar-yen pushing
through 151.95 and accelerating upward,” said Juntaro Morimoto, a senior

currency analyst at Sony Financial Group Inc. “Then intervention risk
becomes real.”

Because the US inflation data are forecast to help cement the notion that
global interest rates are peaking, any surprise in the numbers could have an
outsized impact on currency markets. Bloomberg Economics has cited
upside risks to CPI.
Upside Risk for US CPI Inflation With Sticky Core: Economics
Meanwhile, the options market is adding to the chances of choppy moves.
Traders suggested the yen’s quick recovery from 151.91 on Monday probably
reflected positioning in options. Heavy positioning now of options at a strike
price of 152 brings the prospect of a similar snapback around that point, or
even sharper yen depreciation on a move through this level.
It traded at 151.68 as of 3:54 p.m. in Tokyo.
“The yen’s still on a depreciation trend,” Julia Wang, global market strategist
at JPMorgan Private Bank, said on Bloomberg Television. “The biggest
reason is that the Bank of Japan is not taking a particularly proactive role in
reining inflation.”

BOJ Governor Kazuo Ueda has signaled that a policy shift will be only
gradual while he waits for the nation’s inflation target to come into sight.
While most economists expect a normalization step by April, Ueda has
voiced his determination to continue with monetary easing until he can see
a virtuous wage-inflation cycle.
— With assistance from Masaki Kondo and Hooyeon Kim
(Adds latest prices, comment from strategist at JPMorgan Private Bank)

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

