Markets

Dollar to Keep Cooling Down No Matter How Hot US
Inflation Runs
Greenback to weaken in coming months as US growth slows: UBS
A dollar gauge has dropped 10% from a record high in September

UnmutePeaked, 'Choppy' Economy Ahead: Bob Diamond
Inflation

0:00
0:00
WATCH: Atlas Merchant Capital CEO Bob Diamond says inflation is working it’s way down and looks ahead to
bank earnings season. Source: Bloomberg

By Garfield Reynolds
April 11, 2023 at 10:18 PM EDT
Save

Translate

1:34

This article is for subscribers only.

Currency traders may be looking forward to a far more relaxed time than
other markets counterparts around Wednesday’s US inflation data amid
expectations that any upside in price pressures would fail to sustain gains in
the dollar.

That’s because investors are convinced the Federal Reserve is close to the
peak of its tightening cycle even in the most hawkish of scenarios. The dollar
struggled to rally even after last week’s stronger-than-expected payrolls
drove up Treasury yields.
“We expect the US dollar to weaken as the US growth and interest-rate
premium relative to the rest of the world erodes in the coming months,”
Solita Marcelli, chief investment officer Americas at UBS Global Wealth
Management wrote in a note.

The Bloomberg Dollar Spot index has tumbled almost 10% since it reached a
record high in September, as the Fed slowed its pace of interest-rate hikes.
The euro and the British pound surged over the past month as traders
expect central banks there will lift cash rates over the coming six months,
while the Fed is likely to remain on hold before reducing borrowing costs
later this year.
“The dollar’s downtrend could stall a bit in the short-term, aided by the
expectations of another Fed hike next month,” analysts at TD Securities led
by Mark McCormick, wrote in a note. “We continue to expect a deeper
dollar correction in the months ahead, so would use any rallies as
opportunities to resell it.”

Bond and equities fear gauges have climbed this week as investors brace for
the potential that Wednesday’s CPI release will set off rapid swings in those
markets. In contrast, the dollar’s downward trend is seen extending despite
the data with JPMorgan’s gauge of developed market currency volatility
declining for a second straight week.
MLIV Pulse Survey
How do you think the Bloomberg Dollar Spot Index will trade a month from now?
Share your views here.

— With assistance from Joanna Ossinger

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

