Economics | Inflation & Prices

US Inflation Cools, Spending Stagnates as Economy
Loses Steam
Price-adjusted spending was flat in May, below forecasts
Fed’s preferred inflation measures eased, but still elevated

Unmute
Fed's
Preferred Inflation Measures Cool, Spending Stalls

0:00
0:00
Fed's Preferred Inflation Measures Cool, Spending Stalls

By Reade Pickert
June 30, 2023 at 8:35 AM EDT
Updated on June 30, 2023 at 9:19 AM EDT
Save

Translate

3:56

This article is for subscribers only.

The Federal Reserve’s preferred measures of US inflation cooled in May and
consumer spending stagnated, suggesting the economy’s main engine is
starting to lose some momentum.

The personal consumption expenditures price index rose 0.1% in May,
Commerce Department figures showed Friday. From a year ago, the
measure eased to the slowest pace in more than two years.
Consumer spending, adjusted for prices, was little changed after a
downwardly revised 0.2% gain in April. From February through May,
household spending has essentially stalled after an early-year surge.
Spending on merchandise dropped, while outlays for services increased.

Excluding food and energy, the so-called core PCE price index increased
4.6% from May 2022. That’s in line with annual readings back to late 2022
and shows minimal relief from elevated price pressures. Economists
consider this to be a better gauge of underlying inflation.
Indicator

Actual

Estimate

PCE price index (MoM)

+0.1%

+0.1%

Core PCE price index (MoM)

+0.3%

+0.3%

PCE price index (YoY)

+3.8%

+3.8%

Core PCE price index (YoY)

+4.6%

+4.7%

Real consumer spending (MoM)

0.0%

+0.1%

Under the hood of the government report, a key metric flagged by Fed Chair
Jerome Powell showed a welcome slowdown. Services inflation excluding
housing and energy services increased 0.2% in May from a month earlier,
the smallest advance since July of last year, according to Bloomberg
calculations. The figure was up 4.5% from a year ago.
Read More: Powell’s Favored Inflation Gauge for Services Hits 10-Month Low
Treasuries and US stock futures rallied. Traders still expect the Fed to
resume hiking interest rates at next month’s meeting.
While there are some glimmers of progress in the inflation data, the rate
remains well above the Fed’s 2% target. In light of that, central bank officials
have signaled they’re anticipating having to increase interest rates two more
times this year — potentially beginning with next month’s meeting.
The weakness in consumer spending contrasts with recent data that have
otherwise painted a picture of a resilient economy rather than one on the
brink of recession. That’s in large part due to the strength of the labor
market.
The report indicates slower household spending in the second quarter,
Rubeela Farooqi, chief US economist at High Frequency Economics, said in a
note.
“For the Fed, a moderation in consumption will be welcome news as will a
deceleration in inflation,” Farooqi said. “However, these developments are
not likely to change the very near-term path of policy, with policymakers
committed to the view that rates need to rise further, to a more restrictive
stance.”
What Bloomberg Economics Says...
“May’s personal income and outlays data show the relationship between
income growth and inflation loosening incrementally. That makes us

skeptical the Fed will need to hike rates by the full 50 basis points shown in
the latest dot plot.”
— Stuart Paul, Eliza Winger and Jonathan Church
To read the full note, click here
Low unemployment and steady wage growth have allowed many Americans
to continue to spend on a range of goods and services despite high prices.
Others, however, are struggling. There are signs that households are relying
more on credit cards as excess savings from the pandemic dwindle, and
delinquency rates are on the rise.
That underlying fragility, paired with an expectation that credit conditions
will tighten further, remain key threats for the economic expansion.
The decrease in real spending on goods reflected a drop in purchases of
motor vehicles, the report showed. Services spending increased on firmer
outlays for international travel and transportation.
Inflation-adjusted disposable income increased 0.3% after falling the prior
month. Without adjusting for prices, incomes climbed 0.4%. Wages and
salaries advanced 0.5%, the most since the start of the year.
The June jobs report, out next week, will be one of the other marquee
releases the Fed will have before its July 25-26 meeting. Policymakers will
also get updated figures on consumer and producer prices as well as retail
sales.
The saving rate rose to 4.6%, matching the highest since January 2022 and
suggesting Americans are growing more cautious in their spending habits.
— With assistance from Kristy Scheuble, Matthew Boesler, and Augusta Saraiva
(Adds graphic, Bloomberg Economics comment)

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

