Markets

Goldman Says Markets Too Optimistic on Pace of US
Inflation Drop
Strategists watching impact of energy prices, pace of growth
FOMC is still concerned about persistent price increases

By Joanna Ossinger
June 17, 2023 at 3:40 AM EDT
Save

Translate

1:47

This article is for subscribers only.

Inflation in the US won’t come down as quickly as markets are currently
pricing, according to strategists at Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
Investors could be assuming that a sharp deceleration in growth will lead to
a more rapid easing of price pressures, and tending to be more bearish on
energy prices than what is implied by commodities futures, strategists led by
Praveen Korapaty wrote in a note Friday. They see limited ability for those
things to lower prices, and say markets are also ignoring the potential for
“delayed-onset inflation” in sectors like health care.
“Although we expect further declines in inflation going forward, markets
appear considerably more optimistic than we are about the pace of cooling,”
the strategists said.

Source: Goldman Sachs Global Investment Research

The Federal Open Market Committee paused its series of interest-rate hikes
Wednesday, but policymakers projected rates would move higher than
previously expected in response to surprisingly persistent price pressures
and labor-market strength. Meanwhile, US short-term inflation expectations
fell in early June to a more than two-year low, helping drive consumer
sentiment higher.
Fundstrat’s head of research, Tom Lee, said in a note Friday that price
increases could ease off, potentially this year and possibly amid a drop in
the shelter or rent component of the consumer-price index. The stock
market is beginning to come around to that view and it probably explains
much of the gains year-to-date, he said.
“The Fed can end this inflation war (aka pivot) when the collective public
believes inflation is broken,” Lee said, and his best guess is that it “will be
sometime in 2023.”
Goldman, meanwhile, even has a trade for those who share the viewpoint
that price increases will remain sticky. The firm’s strategists recommend

investors buy one-year swaps to bet on inflation realizing higher than
current market pricing.
Read more: Goldman, Barclays Strategists Hit Jackpot With Bet Fed Won’t
Cut

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

