Economics | Inflation & Prices

US Inflation Indicator Rises by Less Than Forecast as
Spending Increases
Inflation gauge excluding food and energy rose 0.2% in October
Real spending accelerated by the most since start of year

A grocery store in New York. Photographer: Jeenah Moon/Bloomberg

By Reade Pickert
December 1, 2022 at 8:34 AM EST
Updated on December 1, 2022 at 10:07 AM EST
Save

Translate

3:53

This article is for subscribers only.

A key gauge of US consumer prices posted the second-smallest increase this
year while spending accelerated, offering hope that the Federal Reserve’s
interest-rate hikes are cooling inflation without sparking a recession.

The personal consumption expenditures price index excluding food and
energy, which Fed Chair Jerome Powell stressed this week is a more accurate
measure of where inflation is heading, rose a below-forecast 0.2% in October
from a month earlier, Commerce Department data showed Thursday.

From a year earlier, the gauge was up 5%, a step down from an upwardly
revised 5.2% gain in September.
The overall PCE price index increased 0.3% for a third month and was up
6% from a year ago, still well above the central bank’s 2% goal.
Personal spending, adjusted for changes in prices, rose 0.5% in October, the
most since the start of the year and largely reflecting a surge in outlays for
merchandise.
Similar to consumer price index data last month, the report shows that
while inflation is beginning to ease, it remains much too high. While a
deceleration is certainly welcomed, Powell emphasized Wednesday that the
US is far from price stability and that it will take “substantially more
evidence” to provide comfort that inflation is actually declining.
Policymakers are expected to continue raising interest rates into next year,
albeit at a slower pace, and remain restrictive for some time.

Read more: Powell Signals Downshift Likely Next Month, More Hikes to
Come
The median estimates in a Bloomberg survey of economists were for a 0.3%
monthly increase in the core PCE price index and a 0.4% advance in the
overall measure. The S&P 500 rose, the dollar fell and 10-year Treasury
yields fluctuated.
What Bloomberg Economics Says...
“The larger-than-expected deceleration in PCE prices in October adds to
the case for a more gradual pace of rate hikes at coming FOMC meetings.
That said, there was strength elsewhere: Consumer spending started the
fourth quarter at a robust clip, gains in wage income stayed solid, and it’s
possible that state distributions of refundable tax credits -- which boosted
incomes -- won’t just be a one-off.”
-- Andrew Husby and Eliza Winger, economists
For the full note, click here

.

Underpinned by a resilient labor market and sustained wage increases, the
pickup in household spending suggests a solid start to fourth-quarter gross
domestic product.
Inflation-adjusted outlays for merchandise jumped 1.1% in October, fueled by
new motor vehicle purchases. Spending on services climbed 0.2%, boosted
by outlays for health care, food services and accommodations, housing and
utilities.
It’s unclear, however, whether consumers will be able to maintain that
momentum in 2023.
With inflation still outrunning pay gains, many households are leaning on
savings, stimulus checks from some state governments, and credit cards to
keep spending. And there’s growing concern that restrictive monetary policy
will tip the US economy into recession.
Saving Rate Drops

The saving rate fell to 2.3% in October, the lowest since 2005, the Commerce
Department report showed.
Inflation-adjusted disposable income climbed 0.4%, the most in three
months. Wages and salaries, unadjusted for prices, increased 0.5%. The
report also noted that the one-time payments issued by states bolstered
incomes in October.
Sustained wage gains, particularly in service sectors, could keep inflation
persistently higher than the Fed’s goal for an extended period, underscoring
the importance of the labor market to the Fed’s decision-making in the
months ahead.
Core services inflation that excludes housing and energy, a gauge Powell said
Wednesday “may be the most important category for understanding the
future evolution of core inflation,” moderated in October from the prior
month.

Data out Friday are anticipated to show employers added another 200,000
payrolls in November, while the unemployment rate held at a historicallylow level of 3.7%.
— With assistance from Matthew Boesler and Kristy Scheuble

(Adds market open, comment from Bloomberg Economics)

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

