Markets

Gold Hits Another Record as Investors Await US
Inflation Print
Bullion gains as much as 1.1% to hit fresh high of $2,365.35
Geopolitical risks also adds momentum to recent bullish run

Gold is up more 17% since mid-February. Photographer: Anindito Mukherjee/Bloomberg

By Sybilla Gross and Jack Ryan
April 8, 2024 at 8:03 PM EDT
Updated on April 9, 2024 at 11:00 AM EDT
Save

Translate

1:28

This article is for subscribers only.

Gold extended its bull run to a fresh record ahead of the next set of US
inflation data that could provide insight into the Federal Reserve’s next
steps.

Bullion jumped as much as 1.1% to $2,365.35 an ounce as Treasury yields
slipped. Economists surveyed by Bloomberg expect Wednesday’s release of
March inflation numbers may show some signs of easing, a scenario that
would give the Fed more flexibility in cutting rates. That’s important for gold
because it doesn’t pay interest and therefore tends to be more attractive
when rates are lower.

Gold is up more than 18% since mid-February, a move that has left some
onlookers puzzled because of the lack of any obvious trigger — especially
given traders’ conviction on three quarter-point rate cuts is fast fading, with
markets now favoring two reductions.
Still, heightened geopolitical risks in the Middle East and Ukraine, plus
buying by central banks, led by China, have added some bullish momentum
for the precious metal.
Gold is enjoying “strong underlying momentum with the buy-on-dip still the
prevailing strategy among traders,” said Ole Hansen, commodity strategist at
Saxo Bank A/S. With so many bullish tailwinds, he said the metal “is in
desperate need for consolidation, but FOMO is on clear display currently.”
Spot gold rose 0.6% to $2,352.83 an ounce at 10:58 a.m. in New York. The
Bloomberg Dollar Spot Index was little changed, while silver, platinum and

palladium all rose.
— With assistance from Yvonne Yue Li

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

