Economics

US Producer Price Index Rises on Higher Energy,
Food Costs

Unmute

Ad

0:15

US Retail Sales Growth Slows in September, PPI Increases 0.3%

By Nazmul Ahasan
November 25, 2025 at 8:35 AM EST
Updated on November 25, 2025 at 9:22 AM EST
Save

Translate

2:48

Takeaways by Bloomberg AI
US wholesale inflation picked up in September from a month earlier on higher
energy and food costs.
The producer price index rose 0.3% from a month earlier, matching the
median projection in a Bloomberg survey of economists.
Excluding food and energy, the PPI rose by less than forecast from August
and climbed 2.6% from a year ago — the smallest gain since July 2024.

US wholesale inflation picked up in September from a month earlier on
higher energy and food costs that offset more modest advances in other

consumer goods.
The producer price index rose 0.3% from a month earlier after easing in
August, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The increase matched
the median projection in a Bloomberg survey of economists.
Excluding food and energy, the PPI rose by less than forecast from August
and climbed 2.6% from a year ago — the smallest gain since July 2024.
The report out Tuesday, originally scheduled for Oct. 16 release, was delayed
by the government shutdown. BLS did not announce a date for the October
PPI in Tuesday’s release.
The wholesale price data surface a month after the September consumer
price index, which showed softer-than-expected inflation. The PPI suggests
companies, worried that steeper costs risk driving customers away, were
limiting the degree of price hikes to compensate for higher import duties.
In separate government data, retail sales rose modestly in September,
suggesting some consumers hit pause after several months of robust
spending.
“Overall, there is just enough softness in today’s two reports — with respect
to the economy’s resilience and inflation — to keep market expectations
primed for another Fed rate cut” next month, Sal Guatieri, senior economist
at BMO Capital Markets, said in a note.
Read more: How the K-Shaped Economy Is Hurting Everyone But the Rich
The September PPI and PCE reports will be among the last key inflation
readings the Fed will have on hand by the time officials next meet on Dec. 9–
10. Policymakers remain divided over whether to cut interest rates as they
debate the employment outlook with inflation still running above their goal.
Wholesale goods prices rose 0.9%, with 60% of the increase due to higher
gasoline costs, the PPI report showed. Consumer goods prices minus food
and energy posted the smallest advance since March.

Tame Services
Services costs were unchanged after declining a month earlier, the PPI
report showed. Margins shrank for machinery and equipment wholesalers
and rose at food wholesalers. Airline passenger services also picked up.
Economists and investors closely track the PPI because several of its
components feed into the Federal Reserve’s preferred inflation gauge, the
personal consumption expenditures price index.
In addition to airfares, those categories were mixed. Portfolio management
fees and hospital outpatient care decreased, while the cost of nursing home
care picked up.
The Bureau of Economic Analysis said Monday that on Dec. 5 it will issue
September PCE price data, along with income and spending figures.
A less-volatile PPI measure that excludes food, energy and trade services
edged up 0.1%, the smallest gain in three months.

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

