Markets

Treasuries Rally as Weak Retail Sales Reignite RateCut Bets
Yields reach weekly lows, erasing Wednesday’s post-CPI surge
Traders resume pricing in a Fed rate cut by September

By Ye Xie and Alice Gledhill
February 14, 2025 at 5:38 AM EST
Updated on February 14, 2025 at 4:57 PM EST
Save

Translate

2:47

This article is for subscribers only.

Treasury yields dropped to weekly lows Friday after weak January retail
sales data prompted traders to restore bets that the Federal Reserve will cut
interest rates by September.
The bond market rally erased any remaining losses from Wednesday, when
hotter-than-expected consumer price data pushed the market’s pricing of a
rate cut out to December. The price action extended the whipsawing pattern
unfolding as Fed policymakers pursue non-inflationary growth. The post-CPI
selloff was mostly reversed Thursday by benign producer price inflation
readings, which feed into the Fed’s favored price gauge — the personal
consumption expenditures price index.
The retail sales report “pours some cold water on expectations of
accelerating growth activity,” said Gennadiy Goldberg, head of US interest
rate strategy at TD Securities. “Alongside the better pass-through from PPI
into PCE, the market is fairly encouraged that inflation and growth are not
re-accelerating, which is why cut pricing for 2025 continues to rebound from
recent lows.”

Yields declined by at least three basis points across maturities on Friday.
That helped push 10-year yields down two basis points for the week to
4.48%, marking a fifth consecutive weekly decline, the longest falling streak
since 2021. It peaked near 4.81% in mid-January, the highest level in more
than a year.
Interest-rate swap contracts that predict Fed policy priced in about 37 basis
points of easing by year-end versus 30 basis points on Thursday, with the
first quarter-point fully priced in by September. Wall Street views on Fed
policy remain deeply divided, with several major banks including Bank of
America and Deutsche Bank predicting no action this year and several
others, including Goldman Sachs and JPMorgan Chase, forecasting at least
two quarter-point cuts.
US January retail sales fell the most in two years, widely missing economist
estimates. However the month was marked by devastating wildfires in Los
Angeles and severe winter weather in several states.
At the same time, bond investors are wrestling with the potential
consequences of import tariffs that US President Donald Trump has
repeatedly threatened but not imposed on goods from major US trading
partners.
A Bank of America survey published Friday showed investors have turned
less bearish on US bonds, with fewer expecting the 10-year yield to peak
above 5% this year, while more see it dipping below 4%. But participants also
indicated a sharp decrease in conviction, a reflection of the muddied macro
outlook.
Government bonds have also outperformed with interest-rate swaps,
pushing the 30-year swap spread

to the widest in more than a year, amid

expectations that potential banking deregulation would increase the
capacity for banks to hold more Treasuries securities.
“Bonds have been all over the place,” said Jack McIntyre, portfolio manager
at Brandywine Global Investment Management. “Investors are not
convinced about what to do.”

— With assistance from Kristine Aquino
(Update prices in fourth paragraph.)

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

