Economics

Fed’s Williams Says Tariffs Will Likely Boost US
Inflation

Unmute
Fed's
Williams Says Tariffs Will Likely Spur Inflation

0:00
0:00
Fed's Williams Says Tariffs Will Likely Spur Inflation

By Jonnelle Marte
March 4, 2025 at 3:02 PM EST
Updated on March 4, 2025 at 3:48 PM EST
Save

Translate

3:14

This article is for subscribers only.

Takeaways by Bloomberg AI
Federal Reserve Bank of New York President John Williams anticipates tariffs
will contribute to inflation, but emphasizes uncertainty about the economy's
response.
Williams expects good growth this year, albeit slower than last year, and
factors in some effects of tariffs on inflation and prices later this year.
Williams says monetary policy is in a good place and doesn't see the need to
change borrowing costs right away, describing policy as "modestly restrictive".

Federal Reserve Bank of New York President John Williams said he
anticipates tariffs will contribute to inflation, but emphasized there is a lot of
uncertainty about how the economy will respond to President Donald
Trump’s levies.
“Based on what we know today, given all the uncertainties around that, I do
factor in some effects of tariffs now on inflation, on prices, because I think
we will see some of those effects later this year,” Williams said Tuesday
during the Bloomberg Invest conference in New York.
You also “have to factor in how does that affect economic activity —
decisions by businesses to invest, consumers to spend?” Williams said. “And
that’s where I think another big uncertainty is.”
When asked whether policymakers will consider adjusting interest rates at
this month’s meeting, Williams said monetary policy is in a good place and
that he doesn’t see the need to change borrowing costs right away. He
described policy as “modestly restrictive,” and reiterated he expects
inflation to move toward the central bank’s 2% goal over time.
Policymakers left borrowing costs unchanged in January after lowering their
benchmark interest rate by a full percentage point late last year. Officials
have said they want to leave rates steady until they see more evidence
inflation is on track to reach 2%.
During the conversation with Bloomberg Television’s Michael McKee,
Williams said he expects good growth this year, albeit slower than last year.
The New York Fed chief said businesses passed through the costs of tariffs to
their customers after the levies were enacted on some goods in 2018. While
firms are more attuned to how to pass along price increases, he said many
consumers are also more price sensitive.
Inflation Expectations
Williams said he is watching inflation expectations “very closely” and said
talk about tariffs is influencing how consumers think about price growth in
the near term. However, he said he still isn’t seeing “as much of an

indication in most of these surveys that that’s about long-run inflation or
inflation in the future.”
Stock markets around the globe plunged this week, reflecting President
Trump’s sweeping tariffs on America’s largest trade partners and mounting
worries about the growth outlook. The US levied 25% tariffs on most goods
from Canada and Mexico and doubled tariffs on China to 20%.
Investors now expect the central bank to lower rates three times this year,
according to the futures market.
The escalating trade war, paired with data pointing to some softness in the
economy at the start of the year, has fueled concerns that officials may soon
face an environment of slower growth and above-target inflation — a
scenario that could force policymakers to make tough decisions between its
employment and price stability goals.
The Labor Department will offer an update on the job market on Friday.
Officials will meet for their next policy gathering on March 18-19.
Uncertainty Impact
Chicago Fed President Austan Goolsbee, speaking in a separate interview
Tuesday, said businesses in his district — which includes the auto
manufacturing hub of Detroit — have told him that prolonged tariffs will
force them to raise prices.
That, coupled with other uncertainties in the economy, are making it more
difficult for the Fed to assess the economy right now, Goolsbee told
Bloomberg’s “Masters in Business” host Barry Ritholtz.
“We have to slow down the pace of rate cutting until we get a sense of — is
this going to be a temporary shock? What’s going to be the magnitude of this
shock? And what are going to be the reactions coming from the rest of the
world?” Goolsbee said.
— With assistance from Michael McKee and Catarina Saraiva

(Updates with Williams’ remarks on inflation expectations, comment from
Chicago Fed President Austan Goolsbee.)

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

