Markets

Gains in European Stocks Fade Into the Close as US
Data Weighs

By Julien Ponthus
October 12, 2023 at 3:21 AM EDT
Updated on October 12, 2023 at 11:49 AM EDT
Save

Translate

2:40

This article is for subscribers only.

European stocks ended the day barely higher as US consumer inflation data
bolstered speculation on another Federal Reserve rate hike.
The Stoxx 600 Index was up 0.1% by the close in London, paring earlier
gains of as much as 0.9%. The pullback followed US CPI data that showed
consumer prices advanced at a brisk pace for a second month, reinforcing
the Fed’s intent to keep interest rates high and bring down inflation.
“This should reduce volatility on interest rates over the coming days,” said
Alexandre Hezez, chief investment officer at Group Richelieu, a Paris-based
asset manager. He added that the core inflation data leaves room for a pause
for the Fed, while the US employment data will now be a closely watched
metric.

Energy stocks outperformed strongly in Europe, driven by oil prices, while
travel & leisure and consumer products sectors were trading in the red. And
as treasury yields climbed, renewable energy stocks dipped, lead by Orsted
AS.
After two straight months of losses, the pan-European index is up 0.8% in
October and trading just below its 200-day moving average.
Among individual stocks, Publicis

shares rallied to the highest level since

March after the advertising agency upgraded its full-year organic growth
target on the back of stronger-than-expected 3Q sales growth. Barclays
shares lost ground after its chief executive officer said stagnant deal activity,
easing volatility and peaking interest rates would likely weigh on bank
earnings.
Luxury stocks were yet again under pressure after Wednesday’s slump on
disappointing LVMH sales
. LVMH results has turned the focus to earnings
season with a series of profits warnings triggering steep declines, including
France’s EuroAPI

and Alstom.

“Looking forward, there’s a cautious wait for the earnings season which will
likely be the main driver for equity markets,” said Jeanne Asseraf-Bitton,

head of research and strategy at BFT IM in Paris. “Results will be heavily
scrutinized and heavily sanctioned if they disappoint,” she warned
For more on equity markets:
Luxury Gets

Reset With LVMH’s Disappointing Sales: Taking Stock

M&A Watch

Europe: Restaurant Group, Ericsson, Stabilus

Planisware’s Pulled
US Stock

IPO Latest Setback for Europe: ECM Watch

Futures Rise; Cerevel Therapeutics, Baxter Gain

Apollo to Buy Wagamama Owner in Surprise Deal: The London Rush
You want more news on this market? Click here for a curated First Word
channel of actionable news from Bloomberg and select sources. It can be
customized to your preferences by clicking into Actions on the toolbar or
hitting the HELP key for assistance. To subscribe to a daily list of European
analyst rating changes, click here.
— With assistance from Michael Msika and Allegra Catelli
This story was produced with the assistance of Bloomberg Automation.

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

