Technology | Checkout

Cyber Monday Sales On Track to Break Record
Despite US Inflation
Big discounts fueled 5.8% growth in spending, beating estimate
Hot sellers included Legos, drones and digital cameras

By Spencer Soper
November 28, 2022 at 6:47 PM EST
Updated on November 29, 2022 at 10:54 AM EST
Save

Translate

3:54

This article is for subscribers only.

US shoppers spent $11.3 billion on Cyber Monday, a robust showing that
suggests steep discounts attracted inflation-stung shoppers.
Spending increased 5.8% from a year ago, making it the biggest online
shopping day ever, according to Adobe Inc., which compiles the data. Adobe
adjusted its online spending forecast for November and December slightly
upward based on higher-than-expected spending through Cyber Monday.
The promotional period from Thanksgiving through Monday -- now known
as the Cyber Five -- was nothing like 2021, when supply-chain snarls
prompted people to shop earlier and retailers to skimp on discounts. This
year stores were saddled with a glut of unsold merchandise, forcing them to
offer sharply reduced prices to lure bargain-hunters looking to offset higher
food and fuel costs.
“With oversupply and a softening consumer spending environment, retailers
made the right call this season to drive demand through heavy discounting,”
said Vivek Pandya, lead analyst at Adobe Digital Insights. “It spurred online
spending to levels that were higher than expected, and reinforced e-

commerce as a major channel to drive volume and capture consumer
interest.”
Adobe said the surge in consumer spending online during the Cyber Five
was driven by demand, not simply inflation. The firm said prices across 18
product categories it tracks have been almost flat in recent months. Adobe
doesn’t adjust its data for inflation but said that, even if online price gains
were factored in, “there would still be growth in underlying consumer
demand.”
Hot items included Legos, drones and digital cameras. Discounts were
steeper compared with a year earlier. For instance, electronics had markdowns that peaked at 25%, according to Adobe, which tracks 1 trillion visits
to retail websites and monitors sales of more than 100 million products.
Conflicting economic indicators have made this year’s holiday season
difficult to predict. Unemployment remains low, but interest rates are rising
and lofty prices have made inflation top of mind. Adobe doesn’t adjust its
forecast for inflation, but said the slow rate of growth isn’t entirely inflationdriven because prices for many consumer goods, particularly electronics,
have dropped from a year ago.
Big sale days like Black Friday and Cyber Monday have been gradually losing
their cachet as shoppers spread their spending over longer periods. Black
Friday online spending rose 2.3% to $9.12 billion and was better than
anticipated, Adobe said. The total for November and December combined is
set to reach $210.1 billion, up 2.8% from last year, according to the firm.
Shoppers less concerned about Covid-19 returned to stores for more of their
shopping, which blunted online sales growth, according to Adobe. Overall
Black Friday spending -- both online and in store -- was up 12% from a year
earlier, according to data from Mastercard.

Signed
Sign Up
Up
By continuing, I agree to the Privacy Policy and Terms of Service.

Amazon.com Inc. promoted itself as a destination for holiday deals, which
benefited the independent merchants who sell more than half of the
products on the site. Branded Group, which carries more than 40
houseware, personal care and leisure brands on Amazon, said sales
increased 85% during the five-day promotional period, fueled by a late
evening surge in spending. The company had more inventory than it did last
year so could offer more deals, including 40% off a 17-piece Home Hero
kitchen knife set.
“Consumers probably look for deals in an inflationary environment, but this
is also good news about the strength of US consumption,” said Branded
Group Chief Executive Officer Pierre Poignant.
Cyber Monday “isn’t worth waiting for anymore” since most retailers just
rebrand their Black Friday deals as Cyber Monday deals, said Kristin
McGrath, a shopping expert at the deal-monitoring website BlackFriday.com.
Retailers offered bargains on counter-top kitchen appliances and electronics,
which will likely be discounted even further after Christmas for those not in
a rush, she said.
“Anything they don’t sell will be marked down again,” she said. “So you only
have to buy it now if you want to give it to someone as a gift.”
(Updated with inflation context in the fifth paragraph.)

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error

Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

