Economics | Inflation & Prices

Yellen Says ‘More Work’ Remains in Effort to Curb US
Inflation
Anti-inflation effort needs to see ‘sustained progress’
Treasury chief lauds sanction cooperation hitting Russia

Unmute
Core
US Inflation Climbs to Highest Since 1982

0:00
0:00
Core US Inflation Climbs to Highest Since 1982

By Christopher Condon
October 13, 2022 at 2:40 PM EDT
Save

Translate

2:26

This article is for subscribers only.

Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen, reacting to data showing another fasterthan-anticipated increase in consumer prices, said the US has “more work to
do” to restrain the worst burst of inflation since the 1980s.
“While there have been favorable indicators on easing of supply chain
bottlenecks and softening of labor market pressures, we need to see

sustained progress,” Yellen said at the start of a meeting with European
commissioners Valdis Dombrovskis and Paolo Gentiloni in Washington.
Read more:
Entrenched US Inflation Piles Pressure on Fed -- and the World
Fed Likely to Extend Big Rate Hikes After New Inflation Surprise
IMF Latest: Georgieva Welcomes Reports of U-turn on UK Tax Plan

The US Labor Department reported earlier on Thursday that consumer
prices rose 8.2% in September from a year earlier, the seventh straight
month above 8%. Core inflation, which strips out the typically more volatile
components of food and energy, rose to 6.6%, its highest measure in 40
years.
The data was widely interpreted as all but ensuring the Federal Reserve
would raise interest rates by another three-quarters of a percentage point
when it next meets Nov. 1-2. That would be the fourth straight hike of that
magnitude, and traders boosted bets on a fifth in December.
The Fed’s hikes, by contributing to the US dollar’s strength, have put stress
on governments around the world trying to control inflation in their own
economies and, in some countries, struggling to service dollar-denominated
debt. Those concerns have emerged this week in Washington where officials
are gathered for the annual meetings of the International Monetary Fund
and World Bank.
Yellen, in separate remarks this week, has called on creditor nations to do
more to provide debt relief for low and middle-income countries, calling out
China in particular for failing to participate in those efforts.
In her comments Thursday, the Treasury chief also lauded the “significant
progress” made by countries seeking to punish Russia through sanctions for
its invasion of Ukraine.

She said Russia has been largely cut off from Western capital and has
struggled to equip its military in Ukraine. “Constraints on Russia’s real
economy will create a drag on Russia’s growth prospects for years to come,”
she said.
Yellen also thanked European Union countries for joining the effort to cap
the price Russia oil exports.
“This cap will help us keep global energy markets well-supplied even as we
cut into Putin’s most important source of revenue,” she said. “I’m optimistic
about the progress we are making on this together.”

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

