Markets

Hedge Funds Rush to Cover Euro Short Bets Ahead
of US Inflation
Options traders are most bullish the euro since February
Currency trades near $1.08 with focus on US PPI, CPI releases

By Vassilis Karamanis
May 14, 2024 at 4:14 AM EDT
Save

Translate

1:52

This article is for subscribers only.

Currency traders are positioning for a stronger euro, betting softer US
inflation will bring the outlook for monetary policy on both sides of the
Atlantic closer in sync.
Demand for options that pay out if the common currency strengthens
against the dollar over the next week rose to the highest since February.
Meanwhile, hedge funds and interbank traders have trimmed their euro
shorts in the past few sessions, according to Europe-based FX traders
familiar with the transactions who asked not to be identified because they
aren’t authorized to speak publicly.
The rebalancing comes ahead of US producer prices due on Tuesday and
consumer prices on Wednesday. Softer-than-expected readings could lead
traders to assign a higher probability of two quarter-point interest-rate cuts
from the Federal Reserve this year, reducing the gap with the European
Central Bank, which is priced to lower rates as many as three times.

The euro has strengthened in each of the past four weeks, its longest
winning streak in a year, on hopes the ECB and Fed policies won’t diverge as
much as previously expected. Against this backdrop, hedge funds have
reduced their shorts on the common currency by around 40% over the past
month, according to CFTC data.
Economists forecast annual US consumer price growth decelerated to 3.4%
in April from 3.5% the previous month, with the core reading also slowing.
Inflation in the world’s largest economy has been overshooting expectations
so far this year, causing a major repricing in rate-cut bets.
A New York Fed survey released on Monday showed US consumer
expectations for inflation over the next year rose to the highest since
November, tempering euro gains. The currency is currently trading around
$1.08, testing its 200-day moving average and close to challenging this year’s
bearish trend channel.

NOTE: Vassilis Karamanis is an FX and rates strategist who writes for
Bloomberg. The observations he makes are his own and are not intended
as investment advice

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

