Markets

Treasuries Slip on Risk US Data Will Show Return of
Inflation

By Naomi Tajitsu and Alice Atkins
November 25, 2025 at 6:25 AM EST
Save

Translate

1:55

Takeaways by Bloomberg AI
Treasuries slipped ahead of US data expected to show a rebound in inflation
pressures, which would dent speculation over Federal Reserve interest-rate
cuts.
The 10-year yield rose one basis point to 4.04%, ending a three-day winning
streak for Treasuries that took yields to their lowest this month on Monday.
A rebound in inflation could hurt the case for further interest-rate cuts, with
traders currently betting on a nearly 80% possibility that the Fed will cut rates
by 25 basis points on Dec. 10.

Treasuries slipped ahead of US data expected to show a rebound in inflation
pressures, which would dent speculation over Federal Reserve interest-rate
cuts.
The 10-year yield rose one basis point to 4.04%, ending a three-day winning
streak for Treasuries that took yields to their lowest this month on Monday.
That came ahead of Producer Price Index data for September that a
Bloomberg poll of economists sees climbing from the previous month.

At the moment traders are betting on a nearly 80% possibility that the Fed
will cut rates by 25 basis points on Dec. 10, though a rebound in inflation
could hurt the case for further moves.
Anwiti Bahuguna, global co-chief investment officer at Northern Trust Asset
Management, said the ongoing backlog of US data due to the government
shutdown meant an “insurance cut” by the Fed was likely next month as it
waits to gain more visibility on growth and inflation.
“We really are seeing cuts in an economy that is likely to accelerate again,”
said Bahuguna in an interview with Bloomberg TV. The US administration
was likely to ramp up fiscal spending next year, which could also raise
pressure on Treasuries, she added.
She sees a pick-up in inflation as a “significant risk” for next year and has an
underweight position in US bonds, while being overweight Treasury
Inflation Protected Securities.
Read more: Bond Rally of 2025 Faces New Data Vacuum as Waiting Game
Begins
The market will get more supply on Tuesday, with the US Treasury selling
five-year notes, along with two-year notes in a reopening. Investors shied

away

from three- and six-month bill auctions on Monday.

Evelyne Gomez-Liechti, a strategist at Mizuho International Plc, sees
investors returning to higher-risk assets following last week’s bout of risk
aversion.
“With risk assets well supported and the rally seen post non-farm payrolls,
the risk I see is for rates to sell off from current levels as 10-year yields get
closer to that 4% level that has seen resistance both in September and
October,” she said.

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

