Markets | Currencies

Traders Are Ready for Dollar to Drop After US
Inflation Data
Index of one-week dollar risk reversals has fallen below par
That signals traders see softer CPI reading weighing on dollar

By Robert Fullem and Nazmul Ahasan
May 14, 2024 at 3:00 PM EDT
Save

Translate

2:25

This article is for subscribers only.

Currency traders are girding for a drop in the dollar in the wake of
Wednesday’s key US inflation report.
Option traders have been accumulating bearish bets on the world’s reserve
currency in the run-up to the release of the April consumer price index.
That sent a normally positive index of one-week risk reversals below par on
Tuesday for the first time in two months.
Evidence that inflation is ebbing stands to reinforce Federal Reserve Chair
Jerome Powell, who reiterated on Tuesday that an interest-rate hike is
unlikely to be the central bank’s next move. In that scenario, traders are
likely to refocus on the prospect of monetary easing this year — and
downward pressure on the greenback.
Read more: Why US Dollar Rules World and Keeps Getting Stronger:
QuickTake
“A cool print could ignite hopes that the Fed is back on track for a summer
cut, trimming the dollar’s yield advantage,” said Kyle Chapman, ​FX markets
analyst at ​Ballinger & Co. “But the Fed will likely be looking for a few months

of improved data before they can start gaining confidence that it’s time to
ease policy.”
Economists surveyed by Bloomberg expect the data to show the rate of
change in US consumer prices slowed to 3.4% in April in from 3.5% a month
earlier.
An inflation reading that meets forecasts or comes in softer than expected
stands to solidify expectations for two quarter-point interest-rate cuts from
the Fed this year. The Bloomberg Dollar Spot Index slipped on Tuesday as
Powell urged patience

on inflation.

Commodity Futures Trading Commission data for the week ended May 7
also shows traders are pulling back on large and bullish dollar bets. Noncommercial speculators, encompassing the likes of hedge funds and asset
managers, now hold only about $24 billion in trades tied to wagers that the
dollar will rise — the smallest amount since early April.
The dollar has a history of slumping in the wake of cooler inflation data.
Over the past year, there have been three below-forecast inflation misses. In
each case, the dollar ended the trading week markedly lower.

While traders have soured on the dollar compared to many currency peers,
it comes alongside an especially upbeat euro outlook. The relative premium
for a call option on the common currency — or a wager that it will appreciate
over the next week — has risen to the highest level since February.
Europe-based investors have “fully unwound long dollar positions from the
past month,” according to Bank of America Corp. strategists Howard Du and
Vadim Iaralov. As a result, the firm has a bullish view on the euro against the
dollar heading into the US inflation reading.
— With assistance from Vassilis Karamanis

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

