Economics | Inflation & Prices

Yellen Says Flattening Rents to Provide More US
Inflation Relief
‘Every expectation’ shelter inflation moves lower this year
Yellen underscores new leases take time to filter into CPI

Janet Yellen Photographer: Jon Cherry/Bloomberg

By Christopher Condon
March 13, 2024 at 1:36 PM EDT
Save

Translate

1:31

This article is for subscribers only.

Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen said she expects a moderation in the rise of
housing costs will help deliver lower inflation in 2024.

Shelter costs carry the biggest weighting in the consumer price index,
accounting for about a third. They made an outsized contribution to overall
inflation in 2023, and that’s continued this year despite reports that new
lease agreements have increased at a much slower pace or in some cases
even declined.
“It takes a while for that to filter into the CPI,” Yellen said Wednesday in an
interview with Fox Business. “And so I have every expectation that the single
largest contributor to inflation is going to be moving down over this year.”
Government data released Tuesday showed a key measure of inflation
topped economists’ expectations for a second straight month in February.
Though many goods continued to show price declines, a jump in gasoline
helped drive the overall consumer price index 3.2% higher than a year ago.
The core measure, which excludes food and energy and is viewed as a better
guide to underlying price trends, rose 3.8%.
More positively, a surprising jump in a closely watched gauge of shelter
inflation in January was not repeated in February, reassuring economists
that rental inflation would eventually recede this year.
Investors also continue to expect price pressures will ease enough in the
coming months to enable the Federal Reserve to begin cutting interest rates
by mid-year.
“Inflation is down two-thirds from the high it reached in 2022,” Yellen said.
“I wouldn’t expect this to be a smooth path month-to-month, but the trend
is clearly favorable.”

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey

Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

