Markets

Gold Slips as US Inflation Print Signals Likely Rate
Cut Delay
Core CPI for March tops forecasts for a third straight month
Swap traders now price in just two Fed rate cuts by year-end

The precious metal has rallied more than 18% since mid-February. Photographer: Anindito
Mukherjee/Bloomberg

By Yvonne Yue Li
April 9, 2024 at 9:06 PM EDT
Updated on April 10, 2024 at 4:47 PM EDT
Save

Translate

This article is for subscribers only.

1:52

Gold declined after a key inflation report topped forecasts for a third straight
month, signaling persistent price pressures that will likely delay any Federal
Reserve interest-rate cuts until later in the year.
The so-called core consumer price index, which excludes food and energy
costs, increased 0.4% from February, according to government data
Wednesday. It advanced 3.8% from a year ago, holding steady from the prior
month. Economists see the core gauge as a better indicator of underlying
inflation than the overall CPI.
Treasury yields and the dollar advanced after the print, sending bullion as
much as 1.4% lower to $2,319.50 an ounce. Swap traders now price in just
two cuts by year-end, compared with three cuts policymakers forecast at
their March meeting.

The hot print in price pressures means that rates may remain high for a
longer period of time. That’s negative for bullion as it pays no interest.
Still, gold is holding at elevated levels, hitting an all-time high of $2,365.35
on Tuesday after a series of new peaks.
The rally has left some onlookers puzzled because of the lack of any obvious
triggers — especially as convictions on three quarter-point rate cuts faded

fast. Heightened geopolitical risks in the Middle East and Ukraine, plus
buying by central banks, led by China, have added some bullish momentum
for the precious metal.
Gold is partly helped by buying as some investors shifted focus “from the
number of rate cuts to sticky and rising inflation,” said Ole Hansen, head of
commodity strategy at Saxo Bank AS.
Hansen sees an overdue correction to $2,280 would still only signal a weak
correction with a strong uptrend.
Spot gold fell 0.9% to $2,332.23 an ounce as of 4:40 p.m. in New York. Silver,
platinum and palladium all dropped.

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

