Economics

UK Inflation Risks Are Being Dismissed by Markets
Too Soon, BofA Says

By Alice Gledhill
November 20, 2025 at 7:17 AM EST
Save

Translate

2:02

Takeaways by Bloomberg AI
Bank of America Corp. strategists think investors have been too hasty in
casting off concerns over UK inflation stickiness.
They note that more than half the components of the core consumer price
index basket are still recording inflation above 4%, and think UK breakevens
are now cheap.
The strategists warn of "potentially troubling tail risks", including a possible
pivot toward fiscal loosening if the UK's current leadership is replaced, and
the Bank of England cutting interest rates in December.

Investors have been too hasty in casting off concerns over the stickiness of
UK inflation, according to Bank of America Corp. strategists.
Data this week showed headline inflation slowed for the first time in seven
months in October, taken by markets as confirmation that the persistent
price pressures plaguing the UK are finally subsiding. But the US bank’s
strategists are skeptical and have spotted an opportunity to trade that in socalled breakevens, the difference between nominal and inflation-linked
bonds.
“UK breakevens have been on a steady slide,” Mark Capleton and Agne
Stengeryte wrote in a note published Thursday. “We now think they’re
cheap — we’re unconvinced that inflation persistence is over.”
They noted that more than half the components

of the core consumer

price index basket by weight are still recording inflation above 4%. That

offsets some of the optimism that greeted the declining headline 3.6%
number, as well as the slowdown in a closely-watched services figure.
Capleton and Stengeryte stressed the importance of being selective on the
trade, with the inflation-linked bond maturing in 2039 their preferred way to
position it.
Read more: UK Inflation in First Drop Since March Ahead of Budget
There are also other “potentially troubling tail risks,” the strategists said.
Those include the possibility that the UK’s current leadership, weakened by
a series of policy U-turns and internal party clashes, could eventually be
replaced and in turn lead to a pivot toward fiscal loosening.
Chancellor Rachel Reeves is preparing to deliver a budget next Wednesday
that, despite a volte-face on an income-tax hike, is still expected to squeeze
households and businesses as she attempts to balance the books.
Read more: UK Seen Hiking Bond Sales by Extra £9 Billion in Wake of Budget
Such a move could encourage the Bank of England to cut interest rates in
December to support the economy, an outcome money markets are pricing
at more than 80%. But that may prove premature, the strategists warned.
“We are just a little concerned that what is expected to be a contractionary
budget might encourage the bank into what later turns out to be misplaced
haste,” the strategists wrote.

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters

Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

