Economics

Charting the Global Economy: US Inflation Picks Up
Ahead of Tariffs

Shoppers at a grocery store in New York, US. Photographer: Yuki Iwamura/Bloomberg

By Vince Golle and Molly Smith
February 15, 2025 at 5:00 AM EST
Save

Translate

4:37

This article is for subscribers only.

Takeaways by Bloomberg AI
US inflation increased at the start of the year, led by household expenses and
housing costs, making it unlikely for the Federal Reserve to cut interest rates
soon.
Retail sales in the US slumped in January, possibly due to devastating
wildfires and severe winter weather, while economists warn of new fronts in
Donald Trump's trade war across Asia.

Inflation and economic trends varied across the globe, with some countries
like Zambia and Uruguay raising interest rates, while others like Norway and
Namibia saw economic contractions or cuts in borrowing costs.

US inflation picked up broadly at the start of the year, further diminishing
chances the Federal Reserve will cut interest rates anytime soon.
The consumer price index increased by the most since August 2023, led by a
range of household expenses like groceries and gas, as well as housing costs.
The figures will keep the Fed on pause for the foreseeable future, as officials
await further clarity on President Donald Trump’s policies, notably tariffs.
After the CPI report, Trump ordered his administration to consider
imposing reciprocal tariffs on numerous trading partners, raising the
prospect of a wider campaign against a global system he says is tilted against
the US.
Here are some of the charts that appeared on Bloomberg this week on the
latest developments in the global economy, markets and geopolitics:
US
Inflation tends to come in higher in January, because many companies
choose the start of the year to hike prices and fees. That pattern has been
been exacerbated in the post-pandemic era, and several forecasters
suggested that the jump in price growth last month won’t be repeated going
forward.
Retail sales slumped in January by the most in nearly two years, indicating
an abrupt pullback by consumers after a spending spree in the closing
months of 2024. The data encompassed a period marked by devastating
wildfires in Los Angeles — the second-largest metropolitan area in the US —
and severe winter weather in other parts of the country, which could have
depressed brick-and-mortar shopping activity.
World
Economists are warning the next stage of Donald Trump’s trade war would
open new fronts across Asia, with India and Thailand among the nations

most exposed to risks from the US president’s vow to impose reciprocal
tariffs on partners.
Crude shipments from Russia’s Sakhalin Island projects aren’t being
discharged after the tankers carrying them were sanctioned by the US.
About 6.3 million barrels of Pacific crude is being held on vessels that have
been stationary for at least a week.
Zambia raised rates to a more than eight-year high, while Uruguay
central bank also hiked. Philippines, Peru, Serbia and Romania

’s
left

borrowing costs unchanged. The Bank of Russia kept rates at a record high,
while Namibia
cut.
Europe
French unemployment unexpectedly declined at the end of 2024, showing
signs of economic resilience in a country wrestling with political instability
and rising debt. The slight improvement in the labor market provides some
relief for Prime Minister Francois Bayrou’s minority government as it
struggles to cling to power and rein in a gaping budget deficit.
Norway’s economy surprised last quarter with the biggest contraction since
the pandemic, strengthening the case for the country’s central bank to start
its long-awaited easing campaign.
When the weather in Germany is overcast and calm, the windmills and solar
plants don’t send any power to the grid. Instead, they send shockwaves
through the markets. One such “Dunkelflaute” day in mid-December saw
spot power prices climb to more than €900 ($939) per megawatt-hour – nine
times above average.
Asia
China saw record outflows of foreign direct investment last year, an exodus
that threatens to persist after the resumption of a trade war with the US. Net
FDI dropped by $168 billion in 2024, according to the State Administration of
Foreign Exchange, the biggest capital flight in data going back to 1990.

Japan’s current-account surplus hit a record high in 2024 with the yen’s
weakness inflating the value of overseas investment returns. A record-high
primary income surplus of ¥40.2 trillion ($264 billion), which includes
interest and dividends earned from overseas investments, offset deficits in
the trade and services balances.
China’s busiest port processed a record amount of goods in January, as
companies rushed to get their products onto ships before US tariffs kicked in
and ahead of a long local holiday. Shanghai’s port processed a record 5
million containers. Last year, Chinese firms shipped almost $525 billion
worth of goods directly to the US, the third-highest tally on record.
Emerging Markets
Brazil inflation edged down at the start of the year, as one-time energy
credits provided consumers temporary relief from simmering price
pressures.
Inflation in Argentina reached its lowest level since President Javier Milei
took office and annual consumer prices dipped below 100% for the first time
in two years as he continues to tame expectations in the crisis-prone
economy.
Emerging-market stocks headed for a fifth week of gains as traders bet on
positive outcomes from negotiations on US tariffs and a way out from
Russia’s war in Ukraine. Risk appetite

has been increasing on the

expectation that the eventual impact of US President Donald Trump’s
proposed trade tariffs will be blunted by the time international talks and
other delays are over.
— With assistance from William Horobin, Julian Lee, James Mayger, Yoshiaki
Nohara, Andrew Rosati, Zoe Schneeweiss, Petra Sorge, Manuela Tobias, Ott
Ummelas, and Josh Xiao

Save
Contact us:

Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

