Markets

Money-Drenched Credit Markets Withstand Even
Hotter US Inflation
Spreads tighten even as inflation runs hotter than expected
Credit funds draw large inflows that need to be invested

By Tasos Vossos and Ronan Martin
February 14, 2024 at 4:39 AM EST
Save

Translate

3:17

This article is for subscribers only.

The wave of money making its way into the credit market is acting as a
shield for investors against every negative scenario - even the prospect of
ever-fewer central bank cuts this year.
Risk premiums on high-grade and junk bonds fell Tuesday despite hotterthan-expected US consumer-price rises that pushed prospects for the
Federal Reserve’s first rate cut firmly into the summer. A gauge of default
insurance only rose to levels recorded on Monday.
The continued strength of corporate-bond spreads underscores the numbing
effect of persistent flows pouring into credit funds, making managers flush
with cash that needs to be invested. Even a blow to the main driver of bullish
expectations for bond returns this year — interest-rate cuts by central banks
as the battle against inflation approaches its end — is not enough to dent it.
“The overriding driver for the US and European credit markets has been big
fund inflows,” said Annabel Rudebeck, head of non-US credit at Western
Asset Management. They are likely to continue because “allocations across
our different types of client bases are still quite light in government bonds
and indeed also corporate bonds.”

Money flowing into funds focusing on high-grade bonds in the US
“strengthened considerably” to about $6 billion in the week to Feb. 7, BofA
Securities strategists wrote in a note, citing EPFR Global data. In Europe,
high-grade funds recorded their 14th weekly inflow in a row and biggest
since June 2020, according to BofA.
This has made credit spreads look invulnerable to risks. The extra yield on
global investment-grade bonds over similar government bonds dropped by a
basis point on Tuesday and hovers near its lowest level in two years, based
on Bloomberg indexes. A junk-bond spreads tracker fell to its lowest since
January 2022, before central banks started raising rates to tackle runaway
inflation.
Bloomberg Surveillance
Markets React to CPI Miss

26:58

Credit Spreads

While credit spreads have tightened, yields have moved higher since the
start of the year as underlying government bonds have been hit by fizzling
expectations of several rate cuts this year. Rates traders started 2024 pricing
in more than six 25-basis-point cuts by the Fed and the European Central
Bank, based on data compiled by Bloomberg. This has now fallen to closer
to four for both.
“Regardless of those expectations being repriced, overall credit is rock
solid,” said Andrea Seminara, chief executive officer at Redhedge Asset
Management. “Cash inflows are still strong and support is driven by absolute
yield buyers,” he said.
To be sure, the relentless spread tightening has made some managers
uncomfortable. Gabriele Foa, a portfolio manager at Algebris Investments,
said “it’s a good time to lighten up and wait a bit,” as the market is implying
a perfect scenario for economic growth, credit risk and interest rates. Foa is
among those using credit-default swap indexes as a hedge.
Read more: Traders Are Using Credit Default Swaps to Hedge Rate-Cut Bet
CPI Print
Even with fewer cuts on the agenda, company bonds are in a position where
the upcoming fall in yields will boost their performance and lure more
investors away from the safer assets to which they resorted when rising rates
pummeled fixed income.
The latest US CPI print is “slightly delaying rate cuts probably but I don’t see
it as a game changer for credit,” said Elisa Belgacem, senior credit strategist
at Generali Investments. And the cuts to come from the Fed and the ECB
“will support demand as people will continue to move out of cash and into
credit.”

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error

Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

