Markets

Emerging-Market Currencies Rally Ahead of Key US
Inflation Data

By Selcuk Gokoluk and Maria Elena Vizcaino
August 28, 2025 at 6:03 AM EDT
Updated on August 28, 2025 at 5:10 PM EDT
Save

Translate

3:02

Takeaways by Bloomberg AI
Emerging-market currencies gained on Thursday, rebounding after two days
of declines, as US data showed a resilient economy and ahead of a key
inflation report.
The US economy expanded in the second quarter at a 3.3% annualized pace,
due to a pickup in business investment and an outsize boost from trade.
Traders are now waiting for data due Friday for insights into the central bank’s
preferred measure of inflation and wage growth at the start of the third
quarter.

Emerging-market currencies gained on Thursday, rebounding after two days
of declines, as US data showed a resilient economy and ahead of a key
inflation report in the world’s largest economy.
The Korean won, Malaysian ringgit and Chinese yuan led gains. Central and
Eastern European currencies strengthened as the euro advanced, while the
Colombian peso, which rallied for most of the session, gave back its gains to
end the day little changed. The gauge for stocks fell for a third day.
The US economy expanded in the second quarter at a 3.3% annualized pace,
due to a pickup in business investment and an outsize boost from trade.
Traders are now waiting for data due Friday for insights into the central
bank’s preferred measure of inflation and wage growth at the start of the
third quarter.

“The personal consumer expenditures and the price index tomorrow, will
provide short-term direction to monetary policy expectations and the USD,”
BBVA strategists led by Alejandro Cuadrado wrote in a note Thursday.

Signed
Sign Up
Up
By continuing, I agree to the Privacy Policy and Terms of Service.

It’s been a choppy week for risk assets as traders weigh optimism over US
interest-rate cuts against a legal battle brewing between President Donald
Trump and Fed Governor Lisa Cook over her dismissal. Cook sued Trump
on Thursday after the President moved to oust her on claims she lied on
mortgage applications. Long US bonds and the dollar have taken a hit as
traders question the Fed’s independence and the outlook for inflation.
After the US market closes on Thursday, traders will pay attention to
Governor Christopher Waller’s remarks for further clues on the rates
outlook and the direction of the greenback.
In credit markets, Colombia’s dollar bonds rallied, leading gains among
peers after a group of the world’s largest banks announced an offer to buy
the notes as part of a highly anticipated swap transaction.
The next stage of the process is unclear, but it comes a few weeks after
Colombia’s Public Credit Director Javier Cuellar said the government is
seeking to borrow as much as $10 billion in Swiss francs to repurchase
costlier liabilities and ease debt service.
The move is also supportive for the currency, BNP strategist Mario Castro
wrote in a note, “as the government is likely to monetize at least part of the
resources.”
Read more: Colombian Bonds Surge as Banks Move to Buy Debt Amid Swap
Deal

Developing-world equities meantime, were weighed down by a drop in
Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Company, Ltd., after US chipmaker
Nvidia Corp. gave a tepid revenue forecast for the current period. The report
signaled that growth is decelerating after a two-year boom in artificial
intelligence spending.

Meituan sank 13%, the most since April, after the firm warned about losses
this quarter following a price battle with Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. and
JD.com Inc.
The slide in Chinese shares is putting a dent in emerging-market shares’
positive performance this month. All the same, the gauge is still up 1.5% in
August and has risen every month so far this year.
Investors are “assessing the two biggest issues of the day: where is the dollar
headed and were Nvidia’s results big enough to keep the EM AI stocks like
TSMC supported at high valuations,” said James Johnstone, co-head of
emerging and frontier markets at Redwheel.

Save
Contact us:

Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

