Markets

European Stocks Inch Higher After US Inflation;
Inditex Drops

By Julien Ponthus and Sagarika Jaisinghani
December 11, 2024 at 3:19 AM EST
Updated on December 11, 2024 at 11:44 AM EST
Save

Translate

2:10

This article is for subscribers only.

European equities edged higher as data showed US inflation matched
expectations, bolstering wagers on a Federal Reserve rate cut next week.
Here's Why Inflation Could Be A Bigger Problem in 2025

8:22

The Stoxx Europe 600 Index gained 0.3% by the close. Media stocks led the
gains with Publicis Groupe SA and RTL Group SA shares rising after
JPMorgan Chase & Co. upgraded both stocks
to overweight. Retail was
the biggest drag on the benchmark as Spain’s Inditex SA fell after reporting
slower sales growth ahead of the crucial holiday shopping season.
Figures showed US consumer prices rose at a firm pace in November that
was in line with expectations, solidifying expectations for the Federal
Reserve to cut interest rates next week. Swaps traders have now nearly fully
priced in a 25-basis-point reduction.
Amelie Derambure, a senior multi-asset portfolio manager at Amundi, said
the report was “clearly good news because the market was concerned about

the final steps of the disinflation trend and this data is in line.”

Meanwhile, China’s two-day Central Economic Work Conference will map
out the country’s policies for next year. A strong stimulus package could
serve as a meaningful catalyst
for European stocks exposed to the
world’s second biggest economy.
Investors will be eager to “see the glass half-full when it comes to stimulus
measures,” said Christopher Dembik, senior investment adviser at Pictet
Asset Management. “I’m quite skeptical about this, at best there will be a
short term bounce but there are no structural changes ahead in China,” he
added.
For more on equity markets:
Inflation Matters

More Than Market Shows: Taking Stock

M&A Watch

Europe: Zalando To Buy About You, Anima, Orsted, CVC

Ashtead US

Listing Plan Is Latest Setback for London: ECM Watch

US Stock

Futures Little Changed; Stitch Fix, Figs Gain

Ashtead Heads Stateside: The London Rush

You want more news on this market? Click here for a curated First Word
channel of actionable news from Bloomberg and select sources. It can be
customized to your preferences by clicking into Actions on the toolbar or
hitting the HELP key for assistance. To subscribe to a daily list of European
analyst rating changes, click here.
— With assistance from Michael Msika
This story was produced with the assistance of Bloomberg Automation.

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

