Technology

Nasdaq 100 Adds $700 Billion in Value as US Inflation
Eases
Broad-based advance marks the biggest jump since 2020
The tech-heavy index remains down nearly 30% this year

By Ryan Vlastelica
November 10, 2022 at 11:08 AM EST
Updated on November 10, 2022 at 4:32 PM EST
Save

Translate

This article is for subscribers only.

Major US technology and internet stocks soared on Thursday, adding
hundreds of billions of dollars in market value, after investors welcomed the
latest inflation data as a positive sign about where Federal Reserve policy
could be headed
Inflation cooled in October by more than what was forecast, suggesting that
one of the biggest headwinds facing tech could be easing. It could also give
the Fed room to slow its pace of interest-rate hikes, easing another strain on
the multiple of so-called growth stocks.
“Investors have been wanting to bid prices higher on any catalyst, and this is
as good as any,” said Mark Luschini, chief investment strategist at Janney
Montgomery Scott. “The magnitude of the move seems a bit excessive, since
I think it’s too early to say we’ve been given the all-clear signal for tech, but
the market has been extremely desirous of anything that could elicit a more
dovish response from the Federal Reserve.”
The Nasdaq 100 Index jumped 7.5% in its biggest one-day gain since March
2020. The move added about $965 billion in market capitalization. In

another tailwind to the day’s rally, the yield on the US 10-year Treasury fell
to 3.81%, the lowest since October.
Higher rates and yields are taxing on stocks that are priced on their
prospects far out in the future, and such factors have contributed to the
Nasdaq 100 falling 29% this year.

The day’s rally in tech was broad-based, with an index of semiconductor
stocks up 10% and software up 9.1%; both posted their biggest one-day pops
since 2020. Companies that have been particularly beaten down this year
climbed the most; a Goldman Sachs basket of the most expensive software
stocks climbed 14%, while a Goldman basket for unprofitable tech surged
15%.
Among the market’s biggest names, Apple Inc. gained 8.9%, adding more
than $190 billion in market value, while Microsoft Corp. surged 8.2%,
representing nearly $140 billion in created market capitalization. Alphabet
Inc. climbed 7.6% and Nvidia Corp. advanced 14%.
Meanwhile, Amazon.com Inc. jumped as much as 12% in its biggest gain
since February. The e-commerce and cloud-computing giant was also
supported by news it has embarked on a review of expenses.

Meta Platforms Inc. gained 10%, bringing its week-to-date advance to 23%,
putting it on track for its biggest weekly jump since July 2013. Recent gains
for the Facebook parent have also come after it announced job cuts, a move
that was seen as addressing concerns over spending. The stock remains
down nearly 70% this year.
— With assistance from Subrat Patnaik
(Updates to market close)

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

