Economics | Inflation & Prices

Yellen Sees Turnaround of Supply Chains in US
Inflation Data
Soft landing for US economy is possible, Treasury chief says
Yells expects rent rises to slow substantially in six months

Janet Yellen Photographer: Ting Shen/Bloomberg

By Christopher Condon
January 13, 2023 at 8:23 AM EST
Save

Translate

1:27

This article is for subscribers only.

Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen welcomed the most recent US inflation
figures, saying some of the most important price pressures over the past two
years had begun to decline significantly.

In addition to lower energy prices, “goods prices have actually been falling,
and some of the supply chain issues that pushed up the prices of goods and
commodities, those have really turned around,” Yellen said in an interview
with National Public Radio aired Friday morning.
The Treasury chief noted that indexes for rent had continued to rise, but
added, “we see those coming down substantially over the next six months or
so.”
Consumer prices in the US rose by 6.5% in December, the lowest year-onyear increase since October 2021, according to Bureau of Labor Statistics
data published Thursday. More encouraging, prices increased just 0.9% in
the second half

of the year, which translates into an annualized inflation

rate of about 1.9% since the end of June — down from above 11% in the first
half of 2022.
Yellen repeated her belief that it’s possible for the Federal Reserve to bring
inflation down to its 2% target without triggering a substantial increase in
unemployment — but didn’t say how likely she thought that outcome is.
“There is a path there that makes that possible,” she said.
Read More
Fed on Track for Rate-Hike Downshift After Cool Inflation Data
Cheaper Bacon and Flour Prices Help to Cool US Food Inflation
Year of Two Halves in US Inflation With Prices Steady Since July

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey

Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

