Markets

Euro’s Rally to Get More Momentum From US
Inflation Slowdown
Dollar is under pressure amid position rebalancing before CPI
Bearish bets on the euro are losing traction in the front end

Unmute
Option
Traders Brace for Rocky Few Days in FX Markets
Next Week

0:00
0:00
Option Traders Brace for Rocky Few Days in FX Markets Next Week

By Vassilis Karamanis
September 13, 2022 at 4:24 AM EDT
Save

Translate

1:39

This article is for subscribers only.

The euro is up by almost 3% from two-decade lows hit a week ago against
the dollar, and option markets suggest the rally has more room to run.
The bet is that US consumer price data due later Tuesday will show inflation
is near peaking, therefore challenging the dollar-dominance narrative. That
view is behind the greenback’s recent retreat versus its major peers.

Risk reversals, a barometer of market positioning and sentiment, show that
traders are now less bearish on the common currency. The shift also reflects
the hawkish European Central Bank and a fall in gas prices off highs.
Overnight euro-dollar volatility trades around 20%, so a soft inflation
number out of the US has game-changing potential and could support the
euro further.
However, the dollar’s latest retreat is more about investors taking chips off
the table rather than a fresh round of selling, according to Europe-based
traders familiar with the transactions who asked not to be identified because
they aren’t authorized to speak publicly. Demand for over-the-counter
trades in the euro has been split since the latest ECB policy meeting,
according to a London broker, so momentum following the inflation data
will be important for options positioning given clients’ orders.
Another short-squeeze round could be followed by fresh euro demand, as a
move above $1.02 would negate the bearish trend channel which has been in
place since February. The single currency is currently around $1.0148,
having fallen as low as $0.9864 earlier this month.

NOTE: Vassilis Karamanis is an FX and rates strategist who writes for
Bloomberg. The observations he makes are his own and are not intended

as investment advice

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

