Economics | Eco Week Ahead

US Inflation Progress Gets Harder in Last Mile Down
Core CPI seen rising at similar pace in October vs prior month
Busy week globally features releases on wages, GDP, inflation

Prices of core goods probably rose again in October, due in part to higher demand for cars and auto parts after
Hurricanes Helene and Milton. Photographer: David Paul Morris/Bloomberg

By Molly Smith and Craig Stirling
November 9, 2024 at 4:00 PM EST
Updated on November 10, 2024 at 3:55 PM EST
Save

Translate

This article is for subscribers only.

US inflation probably moved sideways at best in October, highlighting the
uneven path of easing price pressures in the home stretch toward the
Federal Reserve’s target.

The core consumer price index due on Wednesday, which excludes food and
energy, likely rose at the same pace on both a monthly and annual basis
compared to September’s readings.
The overall CPI probably increased 0.2% for a fourth month, while the yearover-year measure is projected to have accelerated for the first time since
March.
“The October CPI report will likely support the notion that the last mile of
inflation’s journey back to target will be the hardest,” Wells Fargo & Co.
economists Sarah House and Aubrey Woessner wrote in a report. “Excluding
the more volatile energy and food components, the unwinding of pandemicera price distortions has proven to be frustratingly slow.”
They added that prices of core goods probably rose again in October, due in
part to higher demand for cars and auto parts after Hurricanes Helene and
Milton. Evacuation orders from the storms also forced more people to stay
in hotels, continuing what’s been a “glacial slowing” in services prices.
What Bloomberg Economics Says:
“We expect both CPI and PPI to come in hot, pushing long-end rates even
higher — and further restraining the economy over the next couple
months. We expect control-group retail sales to slow and the
unemployment rate to continue to climb, reaching 4.5% by year end.”
—Anna Wong, Stuart Paul, Eliza Winger, Estelle Ou & Chris G. Collins. For
full analysis, click here
Even so, “the story is very consistent, with inflation continuing to come
down on a bumpy path,” and one or two bad reports won’t change that
pattern, Fed Chair Jerome Powell said Thursday after the central bank cut
interest rates by a quarter point.
The US government will also release wholesale inflation figures in the
coming week, which probably picked up after stalling in September.
Meantime, earnings growth that continues to outpace inflation likely
contributed to another decent gain in retail sales, in data due Friday.

On Tuesday, Fed Governor Christopher Waller is due to speak at a banking
conference before the central bank releases its latest Senior Loan Officer
Opinion Survey. Powell is scheduled for an event later in the week, while
New York Fed President John Williams and Dallas Fed President Lorie Logan
are also on the calendar.
Minneapolis President Fed Neel Kashkari said on Sunday that the US
economy has remained remarkably strong as the central bank progressed in
beating back inflation, but the Fed is still “not all the way home.”
For more, read Bloomberg Economics’ full Week Ahead for the US
In Canada, meanwhile, home sales data for October will reveal whether the
central bank’s rate cuts are starting to jolt the sluggish housing market.
A packed week for data elsewhere includes a range of economic numbers
from China, wage and growth statistics in the UK, and multiple inflation
readings, from India to Argentina. New European Union forecasts will also
be published.
Click here for what happened in the past week, and below is our wrap of
what’s coming up in the global economy.
Asia
A data blast from China may show the economy’s performance improved
marginally in October, with industrial output, fixed asset investment and
retail sales all seen picking up a bit as the downturn in property investment
moderates.
Even so, the data will underscore the necessity of the broad stimulus steps
undertaken since late September as President Xi Jinping seeks to achieve his
growth goals.
China’s slew of figures comes at the end of the week, on the same day that
Japan is expected to report that its economic growth slowed to an
annualized 0.6% quarter on quarter in the three months through September.

India’s inflation is projected to have picked up to 5.72% in October, while
industrial output is seen rebounding in September in figures due on
Tuesday.
Australia gets consumer and business confidence surveys on Tuesday before
releasing a number of labor-market statistics later in the week.
The wage price index for the third quarter comes on Wednesday, and other
employment statistics for October will be published a day later. Indonesia
reports trade data on Friday.
Among central banks, the Bank of Japan releases a summary of opinions
from its October meeting, when it held rates steady, and Reserve Bank of
Australia Governor Michele Bullock appears on a panel on Thursday, with
policymaking colleague Brad Jones doing the same a day later.
For more, read Bloomberg Economics’ full Week Ahead for Asia
Europe, Middle East, Africa
The UK will be in focus following Thursday’s Bank of England rate cut,
which came with a warning of the inflationary impact of the recent budget.
Governor Andrew Bailey is scheduled to make a speech on Thursday.
Wage numbers on Tuesday may show mildly slowing pay growth, offering
limited reassurance to policymakers. A release on Friday will probably
reveal economic growth to have weakened in the third quarter to 0.2% from
0.5% in the prior three months, according to economists.
Other countries with initial GDP numbers for the same period include
Poland on Thursday and Switzerland on Friday.
Turning to the euro zone, Tuesday’s German ZEW index will offer a glimpse
of investor sentiment at a time when Europe’s biggest economy is still
struggling to shake off industrial malaise, and now faces the prospect of
early elections as well.

Euro-zone industrial production on Wednesday will reveal the state of
manufacturing at the end of the third quarter, and a second estimate of GDP
will arrive concurrently. The European Commission in Brussels will release
new economic forecasts for the region at the end of the week.
The European Central Bank on Thursday will publish an account of its
October meeting, possibly containing hints on officials’ thinking for their
December decision. Vice President Luis de Guindos, speaking in Madrid the
same day, is among several officials scheduled to make appearances.
In an interview published Sunday, Robert Holzmann of Austria — one of the
ECB’s more hawkish policymakers — said that a move next month is
possibility but by no means guaranteed.
In Sweden, minutes of the Riksbank’s decision to ramp up easing with a halfpoint rate cut are due on Wednesday, followed by its financial stability
report a day later.
In Russia on Wednesday, data will probably show the economy contracted in
the third quarter — for the first time since war-related fiscal stimulus began
boosting activity back in late 2022. Bloomberg Economics forecasts GDP to
have fallen 0.3% to 0.5% in the three months through September.
Russia is among a number of countries releasing inflation data. Here’s an
overview:
Norway on Monday may show a notable slowdown in inflation, to 2.4%.
But with krone weakness preoccupying officials, the central bank kept
borrowing costs unchanged on Thursday, signaling no imminent plans for
any reduction.
With Russia’s release for October due on Wednesday, policymakers will
watch to see if a 200 basis-point rate increase last month will help slow
down price growth toward its 4% target. In September it was at 8.6%.
On Friday, Nigeria’s inflation numbers are expected to show quickening to
33.4% from 32.7% after gasoline costs spiked because of the scaling back of
subsidies, according to Bloomberg Economics.

The same day in Israel, data will likely reveal price growth stayed above
3%, the upper end of the official target. It’s been above target for three
straight months as the conflicts in Gaza and Lebanon cause government
spending on defense to soar and worsen supply-side constraints.
Meanwhile, Egyptian inflation data published Sunday showe the gauge
slightly quickened for a third month, driven by a sharp rise in fuel prices.
Among central banks, monetary policymakers in Zambia are expected to
leave their rate unchanged at 13.5% to support the drought-battered
economy. That ordeal has prompted the International Monetary Fund to
almost halve its 2024 growth projections, to 1.2%.
For more, read Bloomberg Economics’ full Week Ahead for EMEA
Latin America
Argentina President Javier Milei is likely to get some welcome news with the
October consumer prices report. Monthly inflation may have slowed to a
three-year low of just under 3% with the annual reading coming in under
200%, down from April’s 289.4% peak.
Analysts expect a hawkish tone to the minutes of the Brazilian central bank’s
Nov. 6 decision to hike to 11.25%. At the same time, forward guidance may be
in short supply given that Brazil’s government had yet to commit to
spending cuts, and all the wild cards inherent following the US election.
Economists expect a hike of at least the same magnitude at the BCB’s
December meeting, and many have marked up their terminal rate
projections to 13% or more.
Uruguay’s central bank has held its key rate at 8.5% since April and is likely
to keep it there for a fifth straight meeting.
In Peru, Lima labor market figures and September GDP-proxy data are on
tap, both underscoring the economy’s rebound from last year’s recession.

Banco de Mexico’s case for a third-straight rate cut on Nov. 14 looked pretty
straightforward a month ago, but yet another bout of faster inflation makes
it a slightly tougher call.
Still, the combination of slower growth and 21 straight months of slowing
core inflation will likely see Governor Victoria Rodriguez and colleagues go
ahead with the reduction to 10.25%.
For more, read Bloomberg Economics’ full Week Ahead for Latin America

— With assistance from Brian Fowler, Laura Dhillon Kane, Monique Vanek,
Robert Jameson, Paul Wallace, and Piotr Skolimowski
(Updates with Kashkari in ninth paragraph)

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters
Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

