Economics | Inflation & Prices

How a Key Rent Metric Can Change Path of US
Inflation

The January CPI came in above forecasts, with shelter costs contributing more than two-thirds of the overall
monthly advance. Photographer: Eilon Paz/Bloomberg

By Augusta Saraiva
March 6, 2024 at 9:24 AM EST
Save

Translate

5:12

This article is for subscribers only.

The US government sparked a commotion in late February when it
suggested that a change in a key measure of rental inflation was partly
responsible for January’s acceleration in the consumer price index. The
Bureau of Labor Statistics subsequently tried to quell the confusion, telling
the small group of analysts who had received the message to disregard it.

But economists are still wondering why a seemingly small change could have
had such a significant impact — why the so-called owners’ equivalent rent
metric jumped so much at the start of the year and if that pace will be
sustained, and how that will affect CPI forecasts and Federal Reserve policy.
1. What is the owners’ equivalent rent measure?
Owners’ equivalent rent of primary residence, known as OER, is the largest
of four components that make up the shelter category in the CPI report. The
measure — designed to account for the fact that most Americans own their
homes rather than rent — tracks changes in what hypothetical rents would
be if owners were to lease their properties instead of owning them.
2. How is it measured?
Every component of the CPI has two inputs: the change in price, and the
weight that item is given in the overall CPI basket. Figuring out the weight of
OER is trickier than it is for things like potatoes for two reasons. The markets
for single-family detached housing and apartment complexes have different
price dynamics, meaning that to get prices right, the percentage of each in
the units whose prices are being sampled should reflect their proportions in
real life.
But while the sample would ideally include 80% single-family units, in
reality it’s closer to evenly split between such homes and apartments in
multifamily units. And the BLS doesn’t want to overemphasize this small
sample of single-family units to close the gap.
3. Do the weights change?
The BLS updates the weights of all components in the CPI annually to more
accurately reflect Americans’ spending patterns. The release of the January
2023 CPI had a key change for OER — in order to boost the representation of
single-family homes in some samples where there weren’t enough, the
agency was going to give those units additional weight. While the weights of
all categories in the CPI are made public, the BLS typically doesn’t share the
weights within OER. That is, how much weight single-family detached
homes are given compared with multifamily units.

Throughout 2023, the change didn’t seem to make much of a difference in
OER from month to month. But the release of the January 2024 report threw
economists for a loop.
4. What happened then?
The January CPI — released Feb. 13 — came in above forecasts, with shelter
costs contributing more than two-thirds of the overall monthly advance. The
OER category, specifically — which accounts for roughly a quarter of the
overall CPI basket — was largely responsible, rising by the most since April
2023.
Economists were puzzled at what was behind the jump, especially since
another another measure of rent that OER usually tracks closely didn’t rise
by nearly as much. The BLS said it “received numerous inquiries” on the
topic, so it sent out an email to a select group of data “super users” on Feb.
27 in response.
5. What did the email say?
“The weights for single family detached homes increased materially from
December 2023 to January 2024... No additional information related to this
question will be disseminated,” the BLS email said. One recipient said the
agency tried to retract it and told them to disregard its contents. This left
many analysts more confused than before. So the BLS tried to clarify with a
notice on Feb. 29 that said, “In January 2024, the proportion of OER
weighted toward single-family-detached homes increased by approximately
5 percentage points.”
Economists still aren’t satisfied. Several said that if the weight only increased
by that much, then prices would’ve had to go up by much more than what
real-time data suggested in order to propel the observed advance in OER.
6. What’s the difference between OER and real-time rent measures?
While metrics from real estate sites like Zillow and Redfin get monthly
readings on rents, the BLS only polls its sample groups every six months, so
OER — and therefore the shelter category more broadly — can be slow to
incorporate real-time data. Unlike the price of eggs — which can vary greatly
from week to week — rents typically aren’t as volatile, especially if the tenant

renews their lease. So the BLS doesn’t feel the need to update rental prices
as often, hence the lag in the index.
7. How does this all affect monetary policy?
While the CPI housing data feeds into the personal consumption
expenditures price index, the PCE — which is the Fed’s preferred inflation
metric — assigns it a much lower weight. That’s one of the reasons why
central bankers say they favor the PCE over the CPI, and also partly explains
why the PCE is running closer to the Fed’s 2% target. Both inflation gauges
picked up in January, which helps illustrate why policymakers have said
they’re in no rush
to start cutting interest rates. But economists at the
Fed and on Wall Street still expect inflation to retreat further, so officials say
lowering borrowing costs will probably be appropriate later this year.
The Reference Shelf
The BLS methodology behind OER.
A Brookings Institute analysis of how the CPI accounts for the cost of
housing.
A Richmond Fed explanation of why OER lags other CPI components.
This Bloomberg QuickTake shows why inflation heats up and is hard to
cool down.
— With assistance from Matthew Boesler

Save
Contact us:
Provide news feedback or report an error
Site feedback:
Take our Survey
Confidential tip?
Send a tip to our reporters

Before it's here, it's on the Bloomberg Terminal

©2026 Bloomberg L.P. All Rights Reserved.

